
--- PAGE 1 ---
BHAGAVAD-GITA

--- PAGE 2 ---

--- PAGE 3 ---
BHAGAVAD-GITA 
THE OXFORD CENTRE FOR HINDU STUDIES GUIDE
NICHOLAS SUTTON

--- PAGE 4 ---
First published 2016
Published by the Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies
13-15 Magdalen St, Oxford OX1 3AE, UK
www.ochs.org.uk
Regd Charity No. 1074458

--- PAGE 5 ---

Contents
Preface...................................................vii
Getting started......................................... 1
Gitartha Samgraha..................................19
Chapter 1............................................... 25
Chapter 2............................................... 33
Chapter 3 .............................................. 53
Chapter 4............................................... 69
Chapter 5............................................... 83
Chapter 6............................................... 95
Chapter 7..............................................113
Chapter 8..............................................127
Chapter 9 .............................................139
Chapter 10............................................153
Chapter 11............................................165
Chapter 12............................................181
Chapter 13............................................191
Chapter 14........................................... 209
Chapter 15............................................219
Chapter 16........................................... 229
Chapter 17........................................... 239
Chapter 18............................................249
Bibliography........................................ 277
Names of Krishna and Arjuna.............. 279

--- PAGE 6 ---

--- PAGE 7 ---

vii
Preface
I 
n this book, I have undertaken a detailed study of the Bhaga-
vad-gita and the principal ideas it presents to its readers. As the 
Gita is a relatively short work of 18 chapters and 700 verses, it 
might seem that this is a far easier task than would be the case 
for a longer text such as the Mahabharata or the Ramayana. I 
have not, however, attempted a verse by verse consideration of 
the Bhagavad-gita and have chosen instead to adopt a thematic 
approach aimed at establishing and exploring the main themes 
of the discourse and the principal ideas presented in each chapter.
The Bhagavad-gita appears as a section of the Bhishma-parvan, 
the sixth book of the Mahabharata, at the point just prior to the 
18-day battle at Kurukshetra. In this conflict the hopes of the 
Pandava faction rest largely on the martial prowess of Arjuna, 
the third of the five Pandava brothers. At the start of the Bhaga-
vad-gita, however, we find the hero disconsolate and unwilling 
to wage war against his own family members. It is at this point 
that Krishna, his cousin and charioteer, begins to offer instruction 
to Arjuna. The initial intention of the discourse is to persuade 
Arjuna that waging war is not necessarily an act of wickedness, 
but the full treatise goes far beyond this initial thesis, develop-
ing into a thoroughgoing exposition of belief and practice that 
has had an immeasurable influence on the formation of Hindu 
religious doctrines.
I will consider the Bhagavad-gita chapter by chapter and try 
to establish the main ideas it pursues in its teachings, thereby 
seeking to identify the full significance of this famous scrip-
ture. At certain points, attention will be drawn to significant 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Bhagavad-gita
viii
Sanskrit terms, and some use will be made of three traditional 
commentaries on the Gita, namely those of Shankaracharya, 
Ramanujacharya, and Madhvacharya. I will also try to expand 
the discussion so that at certain junctures it will be possible to 
reflect on the contemporary significance of the teachings and of 
how they can be of relevance to the modern world.

--- PAGE 9 ---

1
Getting started
A Brief Synopsis
I
n the introduction, the position of the Gita within the Mahab-
harata and its status within the Hindu tradition is considered 
before looking briefly at some of the views of contemporary 
scholars. We will then turn our attention to the Gita’s opening 
chapter with a consideration of Arjuna’s lamentation, which 
prompts Krishna to begin his teachings. Moving on to Chapter 2 
we begin with a review of Krishna’s initial responses to Arjuna’s 
refusal to fight and in particular the way in which he empha-
sises the eternal nature of the living being. We then move on to 
concentrate on the idea of karma-yoga, which Krishna offers as a 
direct response to Arjuna’s fear of sinful action. This notion is 
particularly important in Hindu religious thought, as it reveals 
how a person can simultaneously fulfil his social obligations 
whilst striving to attain the highest spiritual goals. 
In considering Chapter 3 we can look in further detail at 
Krishna’s explanation of karma-yoga and then note the progres-
sion in the teachings from karma-yoga, concluded in Chapter 5, 
to the explanation of dhyana presented in Chapter 6. Here we 
find another form of spirituality advocated by the Bhagavad-gita, 
the process of meditational yoga by which one acquires direct 
perception of the inner self, the atman, a realisation that leads to 
liberation from the cycle of rebirth.
After this discussion of meditational Yoga, we proceed fur-
ther into the main body of our text, at this point noting how 
from Chapter 7 onwards the direction of the discourse changes 
dramatically. The opening six chapters focused on the ways 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Bhagavad-gita
2
in which an individual could pursue the path of renunciation 
whilst fulfilling social obligations, but from the beginning of 
Chapter 7 onwards we now find a switch in emphasis towards 
providing an understanding of the nature of God and of the 
power of divine grace. In the middle section (Chapters 7–12) of 
the Bhagavad-gita, Krishna not only teaches Arjuna about the 
nature of the Supreme Deity but also reveals that he himself is 
that Deity. And in response to Arjuna’s prayer, he also manifests 
his divine identity as that which is all things, the unseen presence 
of God pervading the entire creation. 
After the great revelation of the divine in Chapter 11 and the 
emphasis placed on devotion to God, Chapters 13–16 diversify 
the Gita’s teachings and cover a variety of topics that serve to 
reinforce the teachings that have gone before. One common 
theme running through these later chapters is the emphasis on 
Samkhya ideas, the philosophical system that seeks to define the 
material manifestation and to establish the distinctive identity of 
the individual soul in all beings. In our sixth chapter, we will 
consider the ways in which Krishna employs concepts derived 
from the Samkhya system to add greater depth to his teachings.
In reviewing the final two chapters of the Gita (17 and 18), 
we again we find a diversity of ideas, including an exploration of 
the way the gunas, the three inherent qualities of matter, can be 
identified within this world. The Bhagavad-gita ends its teachings 
by revisiting the main ideas it has presented earlier, finally con-
cluding with a renewed emphasis on the importance of devotion 
and the power of divine grace in saving the devotee from rebirth.
Recommended Reading
The Bhagavad-gita is widely known and studied both in the 
West and in India, and innumerable English translations of the 
text are available. Academics have also paid considerable atten-
tion to the Gita, and many books have been published analysing 
the content and proposing various theses about its sources, date, 
origin, and structure.
The problems you may encounter with English translations are 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Getting started
3
twofold. Academic renditions of the texts such as those produced 
by Robert Zaehner, Will Johnson, or Franklin Edgerton tend to 
be excessively literal. This means that they are very faithful to 
the literal meaning of the Sanskrit text but often produce a style 
of English that is difficult to comprehend and rather obscures 
the intended meaning. Other translations give a version that can 
be more readily understood but are produced from a particular 
philosophical or religious perspective. The problem here is that 
translation cannot be entirely separated from commentary; often, 
different meanings can be derived from the same words and 
phrases, and the meaning given in the English version will tend 
to reflect the translator’s own religious orientation. 
Here are some reasonable academic translations:
•	 Edgerton, F. (1997) The Bhagavad-gita. Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, Harvard University Press
•	 Johnson, W. (2004) The Bhagavad-gita. Oxford, Oxford 
University Press
•	 Parrinder, G. (1974) The Bhagavad-gita, a Verse Translation. 
London, Sheldon Press
•	 Zaehner, R. (1973) The Bhagavad-gita. Oxford, Oxford 
University Press
•	 Juan Mascaro’s version, published by Penguin Classics, is 
still popular and very readable, although some of his trans-
lations are rather dubious.
The ISKCON edition with translation and commentary by A. 
C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada is a very accessible version, 
and the purports shed light on the meaning of the text. One 
must be aware, however, that the translation and commentary are 
presented from a specific Vaishnava perspective, and as a result, 
the translation is occasionally tendentious.
Dr Radhakrishnan’s translation is based on an impressive 
standard of scholarship but is perhaps overly influenced by the 
commentary of Shankaracharya.
The Ramakrishna Math has recently produced two English 
versions of the Bhagavad-gita, one with the full commentary of 
Shankaracharya and one with Ramanuja’s commentary. These 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Bhagavad-gita
4
are very interesting works from the point of view of textual 
exegesis and the development of Indian religious thought, but 
of course the translations and commentaries are reflective of the 
commentators’ own religious perspectives and, at times, seem 
to stretch the meaning of the Sanskrit original for that purpose. 
The same can be said of the two commentaries produced by 
Madhvacharya – now very difficult to obtain in English.
Academic scholarship on the Bhagavad-gita has tended to focus 
on the structure of the text and its relationship to the Mahabharata. 
Some studies have tried to divide the verses and chapters into 
various strata, which they claim come from different authors, 
whilst others attempt to demonstrate that the Gita is an inter-
polation that was added to the Mahabharata at a later date. Our 
principal aim here, however, is to convey an understanding of 
the meaning of the teachings Krishna offers, and hence critical 
studies of this type are not particularly relevant. Edgerton and 
Zaehner, however, do provide essays and commentaries on the 
text in which they discuss the meaning of teachings, and these 
will be referred to at different times.
Key Concepts
Dharma
In the Bhagavad-gita, dharma means both virtuous conduct and 
the social duties an individual is bound to perform in relation 
to his varna or social class. In Chapter 1, Arjuna argues that the 
death of family elders leads to a decline in family dharma while 
in Chapter 7 (verse 12), Krishna identifies himself as desire but 
only when it does not contravene dharma. The main reference 
to dharma, however, is in relation to Krishna’s insistence that 
Arjuna must fulfil the dharma of his social class, the kshatriyas, by 
waging war against wrongdoers. We first find this instruction in 
Chapter 2, verses 31–6. Moreover, the karma-yoga that Krishna 
emphasises in the opening chapters of the Gita is based on the 
idea that dharma or duty should be performed without desire for 
personal gain. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Getting started
5
In Chapter 18, the concept of dharma is revisited with some 
interesting refinements of the points made earlier. In verses 41–4, 
the dharma of each varna is outlined, and in verses 45–6, a link is 
made between dharma and bhakti, devotion to God, with dharmic 
duty represented as a means of worshipping God who is the cre-
ator of dharma. It is therefore wrong for an individual to abandon 
his or her dharma; in any case, dharma is not just a series of tasks 
one ought to perform but a part of one’s very nature. Hence for 
the Gita dharma is descriptive as well as prescriptive. It is not just 
what a person ought to do; it is a reflection of a person’s inner 
nature (sva-bhava) generated as a result of past karma.
Karma
The idea of good and bad fortune in this world being the result 
of previous actions, or karma, is fundamental to Indian religious 
thought and is more or less taken for granted in the Bhagavad-gita. 
Arjuna’s reluctance to fight is based in part on his fear of the 
future results of sinful action; and in Chapter 14, Krishna relates 
the idea of karma to the influence of the three gunas over human 
action. ‘Guna’ can be defined as the quality or characteristic with 
which action is coloured. Adhering to the ideas found in Yoga 
philosophy, the Gita refines the doctrine of karma still further 
by insisting that it is the consciousness of the performer rather 
than the action itself that is the crucial factor. This, once again, 
is related to the idea of karma-yoga. In Chapter 4, it is explained 
that actions performed without selfish desire are akarma, literally 
non-karma, because they produce no reaction, whilst even a 
failure to act produces a result if that abstention is based on selfish 
desire. This idea is taken up again in the first twenty verses or 
so of Chapter 18. Action, good or bad, produces future results 
and rebirth in another body, and so one might think that moksha, 
release from rebirth, can be gained only by renouncing all action. 
The Bhagavad-gita teaches, however, that it is not the action itself 
that must be renounced but the selfish desire that prompts it. In 
this way, the performance of dharmic duty becomes compatible 
with escaping from the cycle of good and bad karma.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Bhagavad-gita
6
Moksha
The Bhagavad-gita is essentially a moksha-shastra as its main pur-
pose is to teach its hearers how to gain release from rebirth. It 
is anxious to show that the quest for moksha, literally release or 
liberation, need not involve giving up dharmic duty and for 
this reason it offers the karma-yoga as a means of pursuing this 
highest goal. In Chapter 6, dhyana-yoga, the yoga of meditation, 
is revealed as a spiritual practice that leads to liberation from 
rebirth. And then in Chapters 7–12, we are shown that moksha 
is in fact a gift of grace granted by Krishna himself to the dev-
otees whom he loves. This is revealed particularly in 7.14, 11.55, 
12.6–7, and 18.66. Whilst the Gita offers several different paths 
to moksha, including karma, dhyana, and bhakti, it does not say 
a great deal about what moksha actually is or the state of exist-
ence experienced by one who has transcended rebirth. There 
are many different phrases used by the Gita to refer to moksha, 
but they do little more than reveal that this is the state in which 
Krishna exists, that it is joyful, and that is free from any danger 
of a return to the existence in which rebirth takes place. It is 
also clear from verses such as 8.15–16, 9.33, and 13.8 that the 
Gita regards this world as a place of suffering from which one 
should seek to escape, thereby confirming the first noble truth 
of the Buddha.
Bhakti and the nature of God
There is a lot that can be written under this heading as it is a topic 
the Bhagavad-gita deals with in some detail. In considering ‘the 
nature of God’, one might look at the avatara verses at the start 
of Chapter 4 and then the discussions in Chapter 7, Chapter 9, 
and the opening verses of Chapter 10. One might also consider 
the significance of the vishva-rupa, revealed to Arjuna in Chapter 
11. There is substantial evidence to suggest that the Gita regards 
bhakti as the best spiritual path for an aspirant to follow. In fol-
lowing the karma-yoga and the dhyana-yoga described in the first 
six chapters, one relies on one’s own efforts to transform oneself 
through higher realisation. It is made clear, however, that Krishna 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Getting started
7
himself grants moksha to his devotee as an act of divine grace. 
This is apparent from verses such as 7.14, 10.11, 12.6–7, and 18.66. 
Moreover, the Bhagavad-gita provides the foundation for the 
emotional forms of devotion that are so important in Hinduism 
today. In Chapter 12, Krishna repeatedly refers to the mood of 
love that exists between himself and his devotee, using the word 
priya, to make the point.
Yoga
The Bhagavad-gita uses the term yoga for all the paths it rec-
ommends, and this allows for a very broad definition. Here, 
however, it is probably a good idea to confine the discussion to 
a narrower definition and look at the teachings it provides on 
the types of yoga similar to those recommended by Patañjali in 
his Yoga Sutras. In Chapter 6 and again in Chapter 8, Krishna 
instructs Arjuna in techniques of meditation and inward con-
templation. The important points to note here are the techniques 
recommended, the object of meditation and the reasons why 
this practice is advocated. It is clear that the yoga taught by the 
Gita is intended to allow realisation of the atman within one’s 
own being, and that this realisation is regarded as a means of 
transcending the unwanted conditions of life in this world. The 
techniques set forth involve asana, withdrawal of the senses from 
external objects, and the regulation of the mind so that it can 
be fixed on a single point and maintained in that intense form 
of contemplation. It is also interesting to note Arjuna’s rather 
negative response to this teaching, which we find in verses 33 
and 34 of Chapter 6.
Ethical conduct
Arjuna’s initial objection to fighting rests substantially on his 
view that to do so would be adharma, a breach of his ethical code. 
In teaching karma-yoga, Krishna switches the focus away from 
the action itself towards the motive that prompts a person to 
perform it. Hence for Arjuna, killing those who oppose him is 
acceptable providing his motive is not one of selfish desire. Here 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Bhagavad-gita
8
also Krishna reasserts the traditional notion of varna-dharma or 
duty according to one’s social status, insisting that it is Arjuna’s 
duty to fight because of his social identity as a kshatriya or warrior. 
The Bhagavad-gita does not give lists of approved or forbidden 
acts (it is not a book of religious law), but it does provide lists 
of qualities that one should strive to incorporate into one’s own 
character. In Chapter 13, verses 7–11 describe knowledge in terms 
of the qualities displayed by a person who possesses knowledge, 
though these seem to be more applicable to a person who has 
renounced the world. And in Chapter 16, we are given lists of 
qualities relating to persons who possess the nature of the gods 
and to those who possess the nature of the evil asuras. Here 
again, however, we have an interesting twist when, in verse 5, 
Krishna tells Arjuna that he was born with the qualities of the 
gods, which of course raises questions as to whether morality is 
something one strives to achieve or is just something one is born 
with as a result of previous action.
The three gunas
The idea that matter is pervaded by three fundamental qualities 
(gunas) – sattva, rajas, and tamas – is an important element of Samkhya 
philosophy, and it is one that the Bhagavad-gita makes extensive 
use of, particularly in its later chapters. Chapter 13 emphasises 
the division between prakriti and purusha (matter and spirit), but it 
is in Chapter 14 that we find an extensive analysis of the way in 
which these three gunas (literally strands or qualities) influence and 
shape the lives of living beings. In Chapter 17 and verses 18–40 of 
Chapter 18, Krishna uses the gunas as the basis for his discussion 
of different facets of human life including such categories as food, 
charity, austerity, knowledge, action, and pleasure. He thereby 
demonstrates how the gunas are influential in shaping different 
areas of human life and also human nature. Ultimately, however, 
one who seeks moksha must go beyond all three gunas, even sattva 
which represents purity and goodness. Verses 25 and 26 of Chapter 
14 make it clear that one who seeks the highest goal must become 
gunatita, completely beyond the range of the gunas.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Getting started
9
Context
What is the date of the Bhagavad-Gita’s composition?
As is always the case with ancient Sanskrit literature, it is very 
difficult to give a precise date of composition and there are disa-
greements amongst scholars on this subject. The Hindu tradition 
regards the Bhagavad-gita as an integral part of the Mahabharata, 
which was composed by Vyasa at the beginning of the present age, 
the Kali-yuga. If this view is accepted, then the Bhagavad-gita is 
to be dated to sometime around 3000 bc (according to traditional 
Hindu calculations, the Kali-yuga began on 18 February 3102 
bc). With one or two notable exceptions, most modern scholars 
regard the Gita as having been written in the post-Buddhist 
era. Alf Hiltebeitel suggests a date in the Gupta era, sometime 
between 150 bc and the year 0, and Robert Minor agrees with 
this assessment. John Brockington departs somewhat from the 
conventional view and suggests a later date between the first and 
third centuries ad (see The Sanskrit Epics in Flood (ed.) 2003, p. 
147). Contemporary views are summed up rather well by Robert 
Zaehner when he writes:
As with almost every major religious text from India no firm 
date can be assigned to the Gita. It seems certain, however, that it 
was written later than the ‘classical’ Upanishads with the possible 
exception of the Maitri and that it is post-Buddhistic. One would 
probably not be going far wrong if one dated it at some time 
between the fifth and second centuries bc. (Zaehner, 1973, p. 7)
How does the Bhagavad-gita fit into the Mahabharata?
The Bhagavad-gita appears in the sixth book of Mahabharata, the 
Bhishma-parvan, in which its eighteen chapters appear as Chapters 
23–40 in the Critical Edition of the text. There is a long tradition, 
however, of taking the Gita as an almost independent work and 
the acharyas comment upon it as a discrete text in its own right. 
Modern scholarship has tended to regard the Bhagavad-gita as a 
work that was composed separately from the Mahabharata and then 
inserted into it at a later date by an editor or redactor of the final 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Bhagavad-gita
10
version of the text. According to Franklin Edgerton, ‘We must 
think of the Gita primarily as a unit complete in itself, without 
reference to its surroundings’ (Edgerton, 1997, pp. 105–6), and 
John Brockington seems to take a similar position when he writes, 
‘One cannot sensibly regard the Bhagavad-gita as both integral 
to the epic and theologically profound.’ (See The Sanskrit Epics 
in Flood (ed.) 2003, p. 146)
Scholarly views on this subject are divided, however, and 
others have recognised that the Bhagavad-gita is addressing a 
philosophical and ethical issue that forms a central theme running 
throughout the Mahabharata. This is the problem of dharma and 
specifically how a person can pursue the goal of liberation from 
rebirth whilst remaining active in the world. In the Mahabharata’s 
portrayal of Yudhishthira, Arjuna’s eldest brother, we see a man 
who is deeply committed to dharma in the form of virtue and 
who therefore faces repeated crises of conscience in attempting 
to effectively perform his social duty as a king and a warrior. He 
loathes the violence, anger, and greed inherent in kingship, and 
yet he is duty-bound by social dharma to act in that capacity. We 
might also consider a historical context in which followers of 
ascetic movements such as Buddhism and Jainism were advocating 
the renunciation of society in pursuit of spiritual perfection. The 
Mahabharata is clearly confronting this tension between social 
obligations and spiritual inclination, and we can thus see how 
the Bhagavad-gita adds a contribution to this ongoing discussion 
that runs throughout the Mahabharata. 
Hence, I would suggest that the wider context of the Mahab-
harata is indeed very important for an understanding of the 
Bhagavad-gita, for the Gita is directly responding to fundamental 
questions about dharma that have been posed and considered 
throughout the Mahabharata. Of course it does stand as a work 
in its own right, but an understanding of the Mahabharata will, 
in my view, contribute significantly to an understanding of the 
Bhagavad-gita. There are a number of prominent scholars who 
share this view on the importance of the Gita’s context; in his 
introduction, Robert Zaehner writes, ‘Hence it is fair to conclude 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Getting started
11
that the Gita was originally conceived as an integral part of the 
Epic’ (Zaehner, 1973, pp. 6–7), whilst for V S Sukthankar ‘… the 
Gita is in fact the heart’s heart of the Mahabharata’ (Sukthankar 
1957, p. 119). 
The question of whether the Bhagavad-gita was a part of the 
original composition of the Mahabharata or whether it was com-
posed independently is one that is almost impossible to answer. It 
is clear, however, that the Gita is very much aware of its setting 
within the Mahabharata narrative, and it makes effective use of 
that context in conveying its teachings. Throughout the Bhish-
ma-parvan (even after the Bhagavad-gita), we find that Arjuna is 
reluctant to exert himself fully in fighting against Bhishma, and 
the Bhagavad-gita uses these misgivings as the starting point for 
its discourse on dharma. And then in the eleventh chapter, the 
vision of the vishva-rupa is directly related to the Mahabharata’s 
story for here we are shown that all the events that will occur 
at Kurukshetra are subject to the will of the Supreme Deity. 
Despite their undoubted valour and prowess, the Pandavas will 
be victorious only because of the will of the Deity. In the vision 
that Arjuna sees, it is the destruction of the great warriors of 
the Mahabharata – Bhishma, Drona, and Karna – that reveals the 
absolute supremacy of the divine will over human endeavour. So 
whether or not the Bhagavad-gita was added to the Mahabharata 
at a later date, it clearly regards itself as a part of the Mahabharata’s 
narrative structure and makes considerable use of its location 
there in conveying its principal teachings. 
What is the relationship between  
the Bhagavad-gita and the Upanishads?
The Veda is the large body of Sanskrit texts that comprises India’s 
earliest scripture and literature. The Upanishads, also known as 
Vedanta or end of the Veda, form an important body of philosoph-
ical texts that comprise one section of the Veda and are therefore 
defined as shruti (lit. that which is heard); this, in theory at least, 
gives them a higher and more authoritative status than any other 
religious literature. As a part of the Mahabharata, the Bhagavad-gita 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Bhagavad-gita
12
is referred to as smriti (lit. that which is remembered) rather than 
shruti; however, because its speaker is Krishna, the Supreme Deity 
himself, it has considerable status in its own right.
The Bhagavad-gita is well acquainted with the teachings of the 
Upanishads and makes considerable use of their ideas. At certain 
points, it quotes directly from the Upanishads. For example, in 
Chapter 2 where Krishna is pointing out to Arjuna that the soul 
is eternal and undying, he draws on material from the Katha 
Upanishad, which deals with the same subject of the eternal atman. 
And although the Shvetashvatara Upanishad is a Shaiva text, its 
identification of a Deity distinct from the self provides common 
ground with the teachings of the Gita in Chapters 13 and 15, 
which appear, to some extent, to be based on the Shvetashvatara. 
Furthermore, the idea of karma-yoga can be recognised in the Isha 
Upanishad, and in Chapter 8 of the Gita, we find a discussion 
of the Chandogya Upanishad’s instruction on the best times to 
depart from this world.
To a large extent, the teachings of the Bhagavad-gita are 
congruent with those of the Upanishads, stressing the pres-
ence of the supreme principle within every being and the need 
to understand the higher nature of the eternal self. There are, 
however, some notable distinctions. Firstly, unless one accepts 
Shankaracharya’s view that Krishna is the atman rather than a 
separate Deity, the theology of the Bhagavad-gita does not seem 
to support the Advaitic line of thought pursued throughout most 
of the Upanishads. In its idea of God, the Gita seems to be closer 
to the Shvetashvatara Upanishad in establishing three distinct 
though closely related principles of existence – the Deity, the 
atman, and matter. The Gita, however, goes far beyond any of 
the Upanishads in arguing that one should not merely know this 
Deity but also worship him, and even develop a mood of loving 
devotion. It is this insistence on the importance of bhakti that 
is the principal distinction we can identify between the ideas 
found in the Bhagavad-gita and Upanishadic thought, though 
in other areas of its teaching the Gita makes considerable use of 
the ideas revealed within the Upanishads.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Getting started
13
How does modern scholarship view the Bhagavad-gita?
As noted above, much modern scholarship has been devoted 
to establishing the date of the Bhagavad-gita or considering its 
relationship to the Mahabharata. Some scholars have attempted 
to divide the Gita itself into different chronological layers, 
seeking to identify different authors for different sections of 
the text. In terms of the meaning of the Gita, it is frequently 
asserted that the teachings it presents are confusing and even 
contradictory.
One might suggest that the recognition of contradiction within 
the Bhagavad-gita is culturally rooted in Western perceptions 
based on notions of either/or, whilst Hindu thought has always 
appeared to be more comfortable with paradox and different 
levels of truth. One only has to read the Kena or Isha Upanishad 
to recognise the prevalence of such patterns of thought. Franklin 
Edgerton suggests that the perceived illogicalities in the Gita’s 
discourse are due to the fact that it is primarily a text that seeks 
to convey mystical realisations rather than sequentially logical 
formulae. In other words, it is less important to follow the logic 
of its arguments than to personally absorb its truths by means of 
higher perception. Arvind Sharma, however, rejects this view 
and suggests that any lack of consistency must be put down to the 
exigencies of the situation. Krishna is not primarily concerned 
to purvey a piece of logically reasoned religious philosophy but 
simply to use any means possible to get Arjuna back into line. 
Hence, the Bhagavad-gita is not dealing with absolute truths but 
very practical arguments that will serve their purpose in the time 
and place in which they are spoken. 
Not all modern scholars share this view of the Gita as being 
self-contradicting. John Brockington merely says that it is ‘not 
a completely consistent text’ (Brockington 1998, p. 57), noting 
at the same time that it ‘holds out the hope of real spiritual pro-
gress to those who are nonetheless still very much involved in 
the affairs of the world’ (ibid, p. 56). And on the same subject, 
Robert Zaehner writes, ‘It was only after teaching the Gita for 
a number of years that it appeared to me, with each re-reading, 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Bhagavad-gita
14
to be a far more unitary work than most modern scholars had 
been prepared to concede.’ (Zaehner, 1973, p. 2) 
I am certainly inclined to follow Zaehner’s conclusion, and I 
have never found any striking contradictions in Krishna’s words 
throughout the eighteen chapters. There is no doubt that different 
spiritual paths are offered and one supposes that the Christian 
mind in particular might find this troubling, schooled as it is in 
a tradition of insistence on doctrinal orthodoxy. But the Hindu 
religious thought is not like that particularly where the religion 
as a whole is taken into account. Individual teachers can of 
course be highly dogmatic in their assertions but the tradition 
as awhole is far more comfortable in the presence of differing 
perspectives on the absolute truth. Ultimately, it is up to the 
individual to find his or her own path and the Gita is offering a 
number of different options in the pursuit of that ultimate goal. 
These paths are certainly not identical but that is not to say that 
they are therefore contradictory.
Who are the main commentators on the Bhagavad-gita?
According to the teachers of the Vedanta system, there are three 
scriptural bases for the establishment of the truth about absolute 
reality. These are the Upanishads, the Brahma Sutra, and Bhaga-
vad-gita, which are known collectively as the prasthana-traya, the 
three foundations. Hence, the Bhagavad-gita has for centuries 
been one of the most sacred and authoritative texts for ortho-
dox Hindus and has been commented on by some of the most 
important acharyas in the history of the Hindu tradition. Shan-
karacharya’s Bhagavad-gita-bhashya is probably the most well 
known of these. Here the commentator tries to demonstrate 
that the Gita is teaching the doctrine of Advaita Vedanta in a 
form that is wholly compatible with the Upanishads, though one 
might feel that the Gita’s emphasis on devotion to a higher Deity 
makes this problematic. Shankara overcomes this difficulty by 
contending that Krishna is the atman, or soul within each being, 
and so ‘devotion to Krishna’ is to be understood as dedicating 
oneself to realisation of the atman. Moreover, on the level of 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Getting started
15
contingent rather than absolute reality, devotion to a personal 
God is an essential feature of religious life, and as this is the level 
of reality that most of us inhabit, Shankara himself approved of 
such worship.
The two great Vaishnava acharyas, Madhvacharya and Ramanu-
jacharya, have also left us detailed commentaries on the text of 
the Gita. According to Robert Zaehner, ‘It is Ramanuja who 
probably comes nearest to the mind of the author of the Gita’. 
And on balance, one is tempted to agree with this assessment, as 
Krishna does seem to emphasise both the identity of the atman 
with himself and also the distinction between the atman and God 
in the process of worship or bhakti. Madhva offers us a very lucid 
commentary based on his own Vaishnava beliefs, but some have 
found his emphasis on the absolute distinction between the self 
and God somewhat difficult to reconcile with the Bhagavad-gita’s 
teachings. Vallabhacharya and Baladeva Vidyabhushana have 
also provided lesser known Vaishnava commentaries on the text, 
as has Abhinavagupta, the great teacher of Kashmiri Shaivism. 
In the modern era, a number of new interpretations of the 
Bhagavad-gita have appeared, perhaps most notably that of Dr 
Radhakrishnan, which follows Shankara’s commentary quite 
closely. In the push for reform and independence, both Tilak and 
Gandhi provided Gita commentaries, though with very different 
interpretations. Furthermore, several of the founders of modern 
Hindu movements have seen fit to give their followers their own 
interpretations of the text. Here, we might note the works of 
Chinmayananda, Swami Sivananda, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, and 
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. Swami Prabhupada’s 
translation and commentary have become very widely read both 
in the western world and in India, and many people possess a 
copy of this work. Much of this commentary is aimed at those 
accustomed to western lifestyles, but it is interesting to note 
that the philosophical commentary tends towards Ramanuja’s 
interpretation rather than that of Madhva, despite the fact that 
the author is formally a member of one of the branches of the 
sampradaya descended from Madhvacharya.

--- PAGE 24 ---
Bhagavad-gita
16
The Main Themes of the Bhagavad-gita
Despite its relative brevity, the Bhagavad-gita contains a com-
plexity of ideas, which it presents to its readers and hearers either 
in brief or in some detail. I would suggest the following as the 
big ideas with which Krishna is most preoccupied.
Karma-yoga
This is the main idea that dominates Chapters 2–5 and is an 
important means of resolution offered by Krishna for Arju-
na’s preliminary dilemma. Essentially, the teaching here is that 
action does not produce a binding future result if it is performed 
without selfish desire. So karma-yoga could be defined as action 
based on dharmic duty that is performed without desire for 
personal gain. 
The nature of God and the worship of God
The final verse of the sixth chapter marks an abrupt change 
of direction for the Gita as it moves forward in its teachings 
towards defining the nature of God, identifying the Deity as 
Krishna himself, and prescribing acts of devotion to Krishna as 
the best means of gaining liberation from rebirth. At the heart 
of this teaching, we have the startling revelation of the divine 
vishva-rupa in which the whole of this existence – past, present, 
and future – is revealed as the body of God. This line of discourse 
continues until the end of Chapter 12 when we are confronted 
by another abrupt change of direction.
Interpretations of samkhya concepts
The final six chapters of the Bhagavad-gita contain a variety of 
ideas, and the one more or less consistent theme we can detect 
here is the use of concepts derived from the Samkhya philo-
sophical system. The emphasis here is firstly on analysing the 
component elements of matter of which the world is comprised, 
including the three gunas or fundamental qualities, and then 
rigidly differentiating the inner self from matter in any form. 
Throughout the final six chapters, or at least up until the summary 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Getting started
17
of contents in Chapter 18, we find these ideas being used crea-
tively by Krishna in order to present a range of teachings.
Whilst these three could be regarded as the main themes of 
the Bhagavad-gita’s discourse, there is a multiplicity of ideas 
that are touched on during the course of its progression. And of 
these, some would seem to be sufficiently significant to warrant 
a mention even at this preliminary stage.
Dhyana-yoga: The path of meditation
This is what is often referred to as jñana-yoga, the path of knowl-
edge, when the teachings of the Bhagavad-gita are analysed, and, 
in fact, it could be included as a fourth major theme. At the end 
of Chapter 5, we suddenly encounter a couple of verses that refer 
to the process of yoga meditation based on regulation of the mind 
and senses. This idea is taken up again in Chapter 6, where it 
becomes the principal line of discussion. Here, Krishna gives an 
outline of the basic principles and ultimate goal of the yoga system 
in a manner that is broadly equivalent to Patañjali’s exposition 
in the Yoga Sutras. The topic is touched on again in Chapter 8 
and finally in Chapter 18, where the contents are summarised.
Atman: The transcendent soul
One of Krishna’s first responses to Arjuna’s lament is to remind 
him that the true self is a spiritual entity that cannot be touched 
by any wound inflicted on the body. Drawing on the Katha 
Upanishad, the Bhagavad-gita insists that the atman is a spiritual 
entity entirely distinct from its present embodiment, which trans-
migrates to another bodily form at the time of death.
Dharma and social order
Another of Krishna’s preliminary arguments, prior to his expo-
sition on karma-yoga, is based on the notion of varna-dharma. 
Arjuna’s duty is to fight because of his birth in a particular social 
stratum, the kshatriya class, whose dharmic duty is to administer, 
rule, and fight. At different points throughout the Gita, Krishna 
insists that Arjuna must adhere to his social dharma, but in the 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Bhagavad-gita
18
eighteenth chapter the point is explored again in more detail. 
Here we have definitions of the duties of the four varnas (social 
classes), and then an explanation that each person is precondi-
tioned by their inherent nature to act in the manner designated 
by their birth identity.

--- PAGE 27 ---

19
Gitartha Samgraha
T
he initial division of the Bhagavad-gita into three broad 
strands is not an original idea and is derived from Yamu-
nacharya, who explains it more fully in his Gitartha 
Samgraha, dividing the text into three equal portions of six 
chapters each (1–6, 7–12 and 13–18). Yamunacharya was one 
of the early teachers of the Sri Vaishnava sect and was a senior 
contemporary of Ramanujacharya. We conclude this introduc-
tion with the Gitartha Samgraha before proceeding to the text 
of the Gita itself.
The Gitartha Samgraha of Sri 
Yamunacharya (d. ad 1038)
In the Bhagavad-gita, Narayana is declared to be the Supreme 
Brahman. He can be attained only through bhakti, which is 
performed by the acceptance of one’s own dharma, through acqui-
sition of knowledge and through renunciation of attachment.
1.	
In the first six chapters, the performance of desireless 
karma and the acquisition of true knowledge through 
yoga practice is enjoined, so that one can realise 
the atman.
2.	
In the middle six chapters, bhakti which is brought 
about through karma and jñana is discussed. Bhakti 
brings realisation of the truth concerning Bhagavan.
3.	
The final six verses cast further elucidation on what 
has gone before. Here matter (pradhana) and the soul 
(purusha) are explained as well as Ishvara. In addi-
tion the disciplines related to work, knowledge, and 

--- PAGE 28 ---
Bhagavad-gita
20
devotion are further discussed by way of supplement-
ing what has gone before.
4.	
This treatise was spoken for Arjuna’s sake when he 
was overwhelmed by misplaced love and compas-
sion and when he was perplexed about dharma and 
adharma and took shelter of Sri Krishna.
5.	
In the second chapter, Samkhya and Yoga are 
described. Samkhya describes the transcendent self, 
whilst Yoga refers to desireless action. These lead to 
unwavering knowledge and are taught to remove 
Arjuna’s delusion.
6.	
In the third chapter, the need to perform karma with-
out any desire except for the pleasure of the Lord 
and the protection of the world is taught. The agency 
for action is to be seen as the three gunas and the 
Supreme Lord.
7.	
The following subjects are covered in the fourth 
chapter: an incidental explanation of Krishna’s nature, 
that karma-yoga is also connected to true knowledge; 
the varieties of karma-yoga and the significance of 
knowledge within karma-yoga are also emphasised.
8.	
The ease and instant effect of karma-yoga are explained 
in the fifth chapter as well as some of its component 
stages and how brahman is known as the self.
9.	
In the sixth chapter, concentration and meditation 
are presented as forms of yoga and the four types of 
successful yogin, the means of success in yoga and the 
highest status of the yoga that has Krishna as its object.
10.	
In the seventh chapter, Krishna teaches knowledge 
of himself, his concealment within prakriti, surrender 
to him as a means of release, the practices of different 
types of devotee and the highest status of the devotee 
who possesses knowledge.
11.	
The eighth chapter reveals the distinctions of what is 
understood and what is acquired by each of the three 
classes of devotees: those who seek prosperity, those 

--- PAGE 29 ---
Gitartha Samgraha
21
who seek the true nature of the self and those who 
are devoted to the Lord.
12.	
In the ninth chapter the Lord speaks of his own 
supremacy as the divine even when he comes to earth 
as avatars and of the excellence of the mahatmas who 
seek God alone and of the discipline of bhakti.
13.	
In the tenth chapter He describes in detail the infinite 
auspicious attributes of the Lord and his absolute con-
trol over all things so as to generate a mood of bhakti 
in the minds of aspirants.
14.	
In the eleventh chapter, it is stated that the divine 
vision which gives immediate vision of God was 
given to Arjuna and that bhakti is the only means for 
knowing and attaining him in this way.
15.	
In the twelfth chapter, the superiority of bhakti is 
taught, the means to practise bhakti, directions for 
meditating on the self, details of the desired quali-
ties, the modes of sadhana (religious practice) to be 
adopted and the vast love of the Lord for his devotees.
16.	
In the thirteenth chapter, the nature of the body, the 
means of realising the self, the nature of the self, the 
cause of bondage, and discrimination between the self 
and the body are described.
17.	
In the fourteenth chapter, the bondage of the gunas, 
their agency in the performance of action and 
how to eliminate their influence are described. It 
also describes how the three ends of heaven, abid-
ing in the self and existence within the Lord may 
be attained.
18.	
In the fifteenth chapter, the Supreme Lord is declared 
to be different from the self both in its state of union 
with matter and in its liberated state, because He per-
vades, sustains, and rules over the individual souls and 
the world.
19.	 The sixteenth chapter first describes the differences 
between the devic and the asuric natures in order to 

--- PAGE 30 ---
Bhagavad-gita
22
establish the truth and proper conduct, which can be 
pursued only by submission to the shastras.
20.	 In the seventeenth chapter the following topics are 
dealt with: rejection of paths not recommended by 
the shastras, the injunctions of the shastras in accor-
dance with the gunas and the characteristics of the 
three words, ‘om’, ‘tat’, and ‘sat’.
21.	 The final chapter describes the mental state necessary 
for allowing that the Lord is the real controller, the 
necessity of developing the sattvic nature, the spiritual 
end gained by fulfilling one’s duties, and bhakti-yoga 
which is the essence of the Gita Shastra.
22.	 Karma-yoga means to practise austerity, pilgrimage, 
charity, yajña, and other such acts. Jñana-yoga means to 
control the mind and then to abide within the puri-
fied self.
23.	 Bhakti-yoga means to practise meditation and other 
forms of worship with undeviating love for the 
Supreme Being. These three yogas are inter-connected.
24.	 Obligatory and occasional duties are connected to 
all three yogas as they are means of worshipping the 
Supreme Lord. All three grant vision of the self, but 
bhakti can be practised before such vision by means of 
japa, bhajan, pilgrimage, etc. even with only superficial 
love of God.
25.	 When ignorance is removed and one perceives the self 
as subservient to God, one attains supreme devotion 
and thereby reaches his domain. There is vaidhi (reg-
ulated) bhakti, para (higher) bhakti and finally parama 
(supreme) bhakti.
26.	 Bhakti-yoga can grant prosperity and sovereignty if 
one desires them. If one desires to attain the self, all 
three yogas are effective in the attainment of kaivalya 
(separation from matter).
27.	 The understanding that Bhagavan (God) is the highest 
end is common to all three types of yogin, but if one 

--- PAGE 31 ---
Gitartha Samgraha
23
overlooks the other two and aspires only for the Lord, 
one will attain him completely.
28.	 The jñanin is one who is devoted exclusively to the 
Lord and whose whole existence depends upon him. 
Contact with God is his only joy, separation his only 
grief. His thoughts are focussed only on God.
29.	 When one finds pleasure only in thinking, meditating, 
speaking, worshipping, and praising the Lord, then 
the senses, intellect, mind, and vital forces all become 
concentrated upon him.
30.	
Regarding all disciplines just as means of pleasing the 
Lord, without any other motive, one should give up 
dependence on anything but him and abandon any 
fear that this means will be incomplete.
31.	
Such a person finds pleasure only in undeviating ser-
vice to God. He then attains his domain. This Gita 
Shastra is meant mainly for such a devotee. This is a 
summary of its meaning.

--- PAGE 32 ---

--- PAGE 33 ---

25
Chapter 1
T
he main function of this opening chapter is to introduce 
the conversation that ensues and to provide a setting for 
Krishna’s instructions. In fact, verses 2–19 are taken almost 
verbatim from a later chapter of the Mahabharata (Chapter 47 of 
the Bhishma-parvan) in which the preparations for the second day 
of the battle are described.
Hence, the setting for the Gita discourse really begins from 
verse 20 and it is from this point on that we need to be more 
precisely aware of what is taking place. Arjuna asks Krishna, 
his friend and charioteer, to take up a position between the two 
armies so that he can look across at those he must fight. The 
sight of all his friends and relatives gathered there ready for battle 
fills Arjuna with dismay, and he decides that he will in effect 
withdraw from the conflict. In understanding the Bhagavad-gita, 
it is important to note the arguments that Arjuna then gives to 
support his decision to give up the fight as these provide at least 
the preliminary stimulus for Krishna’s response.
Verses 1–47
1.	
Dhritarashtra said: On the field of dharma at Kuruk-
shetra, what did my sons and the sons of Pandu do 
when they assembled there seeking battle, O Samjaya?
2.	
Samjaya said: On seeing the battle array of the Pan-
dava host, King Duryodhana approached the acharya 
and spoke these words.
3.	
Behold this mighty army of the sons of Pandu, acha-
rya, arranged in battle array by the son of Drupada, 

--- PAGE 34 ---
Bhagavad-gita
26
your intelligent disciple.
4.	
There are heroes and great bowmen in that host, the 
equals in battle of Bhima and Arjuna: Yuyudhana, 
Virata, and Drupada that great chariot warrior.
5.	
Then there are Dhrishtaketu, Chekitana, and the 
heroic King of Kashi; Purujit, Kuntibhoja, and Shaibya 
who is a hero amongst men;
6.	
The mighty Yudhamanyu, the heroic Uttamaujas, the 
son of Subhadra, and the sons of Draupadi; all of them 
are great chariot warriors.
7.	
Now learn about those who are most prominent on 
our side, O best of brahmins. For your understanding 
I will inform you about the captains leading my army.
8.	
There is yourself, and then Bhishma, Karna, the 
all-conquering Kripa, Ashvatthaman, Vikarna, and the 
son of Somadatta as well.
9.	
And many other heroes are willing to lay down their 
lives for my sake. They carry many different types 
of weapon and all of them are skilled in the arts 
of warfare.
10.	
 Guarded by Bhishma, our strength is unlimited but 
their strength, guarded by Bhima, is limited indeed.
11.	
Situated in each of your allotted stations, all of you 
must give protection to Bhishma.
12.	 The senior member of the Kuru house, Duryodhana’s 
mighty grandfather, then roared as loudly as a lion 
and blew on his conch shell. This sound brought joy 
to Duryodhana.
13.	
Conch shells, kettledrums, panava drums, anaka drums, 
and horns then immediately resounded all together 
making a tumultuous sound.
14.	
Mounted on a mighty chariot yoked to white horses, 
Madhava and the Pandava then blew their celestial 
conch shells.
15.	
Hrishikesha sounded the Panchajanya and Dhanam-
jaya blew on the Devadatta. Vrikodara, the performer 

--- PAGE 35 ---
Chapter 1
27
of formidable deeds (bhima-karma), blew the great 
conch shell known as Paundra.
16.	
King Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, blew the Anan-
tavijaya, Nakula blew the Sughosha, and Sahadeva 
sounded the Manipushpaka.
17.	
That mighty bowman the King of Kashi, Shikandin 
the great chariot warrior, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, the 
unconquerable Satyaki,
18.	
Drupada and all the sons of Draupadi, O lord of the 
earth, as well as the mighty son of Subadhra then blew 
their respective conch shells.
19.	 That sound shattered the hearts of the sons of Dhri-
tarashtra for the tumult resonated across both the sky 
and the earth.
20.	 Seeing the sons of Dhritarashtra gathered there 
and the weapons starting to fly, the Pandava with a 
monkey on his banner took up his bow.
21.	
He then spoke the following words to Hrishikesha, O 
lord of the earth. Kindly position my chariot in the 
space between the two armies, Acyuta,
22.	 So that I can look upon all those who have assembled 
here seeking battle. Let me see those with whom I 
will have to fight in this warlike endeavour.
23.	
I see them assembled here intent on battle, seeking to 
please the ignorant son of Dhritarashtra by fighting 
on his behalf.
24.	 Addressed in this way by Gudakesha, O Bharata, Hri-
shikesha positioned that wonderful chariot in the 
space between the two armies.
25.	
In the presence of Bhishma and Drona and all the 
kings of world, he said, Behold, Partha, the Kurus 
gathered here together.
26.	 Partha could see fathers and grandfathers standing 
there, as well as the teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, 
sons, grandsons, allies,
27.	
Fathers-in-law, and friends who were present in the 

--- PAGE 36 ---
Bhagavad-gita
28
two armies. On seeing all his family members stand-
ing nearby, the Kaunteya
28.	 Was overwhelmed with profound compassion and 
spoke these words in a mood of dejection, On seeing 
these relatives here, Krishna, standing ready and seek-
ing battle,
29.	 My limbs are failing me, my mouth is drying up, there 
are tremors all over my body and its hairs are standing 
erect.
30.	 The bow named Gandiva slips from my hand and my 
skin is burning. I can no longer stand up for my mind 
has become dizzy.
31.	
I see unfavourable omens, Keshava; I cannot see how 
anything good can come from killing my own kins-
men in this battle.
32.	
I have no desire for victory, Krishna, nor for a king-
dom or for worldly pleasure. What is the point of our 
gaining a kingdom, Govinda, or objects of enjoyment 
or even maintaining our lives,
33.	 When all those for whom we might desire a kingdom, 
objects of enjoyment and the pleasures of life are 
taking part in this war, giving up their lives and their 
wealth?
34.	
By that I mean our teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers, 
maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-
in-law, and other relatives.
35.	
Though they may kill me I have no wish to kill these 
men, Madhusudana, not even if we could gain domin-
ion over the three worlds thereby, how much less then 
for acquiring this earth?
36.	 After killing the sons of Dhritarashtra what pleasure 
would there be for us, Janardana? Sin alone would 
come to us by killing these men who seek to kill us.
37.	
We have no right to kill the sons of Dhritarashtra for 
they are our own relatives. How could we ever be 
happy again after destroying our family, Madhava?

--- PAGE 37 ---
Chapter 1
29
38.	
Even if their consciences have been obliterated by 
greed and they cannot see the evil inherent in causing 
the destruction of their family or the sin involved in 
betraying a friend,
39.	
How can we fail to have wisdom enough to turn 
away from such a sin, for we can certainly see what a 
crime it is to bring about the destruction of the family, 
Janardana.
40.	 When a family is devastated in this way, the ancient 
traditions of dharma relating to the family also perish. 
And when such dharma perishes adharma predomi-
nates over the entire family.
41.	 And as a result of the predominance of adharma, 
Krishna, the women of the family become degraded; 
and when the women are thus degraded, a mingling 
of the varnas arises.
42.	
Such a mingling leads both the destroyer of the family 
and the family itself to hell. Deprived of the ritual 
offerings of pinda and water, the ancestors of such 
families fall from their position.
43.	 As a result of the wicked acts of those who harm the 
family, acts which lead to a mingling of the varnas, 
the eternal forms of dharma rooted in caste (jati) and 
family are destroyed.
44.	 And we have heard, Janardana, that there is undoubt-
edly an abode in hell for those men who are destroy-
ers of family dharma.
45.	 Alas! Alas! We are bent on performing a most sinful 
deed by slaying our family members in battle due to 
our greed for the pleasure of sovereignty.
46.	 If the sons of Dhritarashtra, weapons in hand, were to 
slay me in battle unresisting and unarmed, that would 
be better for me.
47.	
After speaking in this way on the field of battle, Arjuna 
sat down on the seat of the chariot and cast aside his 
bow and his arrows, his mind agitated by sorrow.

--- PAGE 38 ---
Bhagavad-gita
30
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 1
There are a number of points we could make here in summarising 
Arjuna’s response to the situation he finds himself in. In verse 28, 
we read that he was overwhelmed by a deep sense of compassion 
and it is this that initially gives rise to his misgivings about the 
course of action he is set on. The Sanskrit word used here is kripa, 
which is usually regarded as a very positive quality, reflecting a 
person’s concern for others who are in distress.
The first point made by Arjuna himself is a very logical one – 
victory in this war will not make them happy. Deprived of their 
rightful share of the kingdom, the Pandavas have been living 
a wretched life as exiles. Now they are seeking to regain the 
position that is rightfully theirs so that they can find satisfaction 
once more. Arjuna’s point here is that in order to recover their 
kingdom they will have to kill many of their own family mem-
bers, a course of action that will mean that any resulting gains 
will not bring them the happiness and satisfaction they seek.
From verse 38 onwards, Arjuna begins to reflect on the matter 
in relation to dharma, the proper execution of religious duty. The 
Pandavas are kshatriyas, and hence for them waging war is not in 
conflict with varna-dharma. Arjuna argues, however, that a war 
of this type does contravene dharmic duty because it will lead 
to the destruction of their family and a concomitant collapse 
of family dharma. In verse 43, he refers to kula-dharma and jati-
dharma, dharma relating to the family and dharma relating to his 
caste or community. Although waging war is action in accord-
ance with his varna-dharma as a kshatriya, an internal family war 
is in breach of these other forms of dharma and will lead only to 
the degradation of the family. It is interesting to note here the 
extent to which Arjuna is set against any mingling of the varnas, 
which he sees as a cause of immorality amongst the women of 
the family. It is sometimes said that this is an idea espoused by 
the Bhagavad-gita, but as we shall see, Arjuna’s words here are 
not accepted by Krishna.
A further point made by Arjuna is that the killing of family 
members is a sinful action because it leads to a decline in dharma. 

--- PAGE 39 ---
Chapter 1
31
In verse 45, he describes the course of action they are proposing 
to follow as mahat papam, a great sin, which will lead to terrible 
misfortune in the future as the law of karma shapes their unfold-
ing destiny. Here Arjuna expresses the view that a sin as great as 
this will condemn the Pandavas to existence in hell for they will 
be acting as the destroyers of dharma. Moreover, their motives in 
waging war are not represented as being particularly noble ones. 
In verse 45, he describes the impetus for war as rajya-sukha-lobha, 
greed for the joy of sovereignty. So inspired by selfish desire, the 
Pandavas are about to follow a course of action that will destroy 
the dharma of their family and their community. How can this 
be righteous?
Although Arjuna is described initially as being overwhelmed 
by compassion, his objection to warfare is not based on any advo-
cacy of non-violence or even a moral perspective. One suspects 
that his fundamental response to the situation is an emotional 
one and that he is then constructing a line of rational argument 
to justify his emotional impulses, and this view is confirmed by 
Krishna’s initial response at the start of Chapter 2. The argument 
he constructs rests on the idea that the right course of action must 
be one that either brings benefit to the performer or else is in 
accordance with dharma. According to Arjuna, his waging war 
at Kurukshetra will meet neither of these two criteria. Now let 
us go on to see how Krishna responds to this argument.

--- PAGE 40 ---

--- PAGE 41 ---

33
Chapter 2
I
n looking at the opening phase of the Bhagavad-gita’s expo-
sition, we will take Chapters 2 and 3 in order, breaking them 
down into discrete passages and trying to identify the points 
Krishna makes and the reasons why he makes them. Underlying 
this approach is the view that the Gita is an ordered discourse 
that proceeds step by step to set out a specific form of religious 
teaching. Let us now move on and consider the second chapter.
Verses 1–3: Krishna’s rebuke
1.	
Samjaya said: Madhusudana then spoke the follow-
ing words to Arjuna who was filled with compassion, 
whose eyes were agitated and full of tears, and who 
was lamenting.
2.	
The Lord said: Whence could such faintheartedness 
have come upon you at this time of trial? This is not 
proper for a civilised man, it does not lead to heaven 
and it will bring dishonour.
3.	
Do not give up your manhood in this way, Partha! 
Such a mood ill becomes you. Giving up this pathetic 
weakness of heart, arise, O destroyer of the foe.
It is interesting to note here that Krishna’s initial response to 
the points made by Arjuna in Chapter 1 is to dismiss the whole 
case as being nothing more than an emotional outpouring that 
is not worthy of a reasoned reply. Arjuna may have presented 
some viable arguments, but here Krishna seems to regard the 
whole thing as a form of mental weakness. Hence his first reply 
is also on the emotional level; he does not seek to answer any 

--- PAGE 42 ---
Bhagavad-gita
34
of Arjuna’s arguments but turns immediately to the emotional 
trauma that is at the heart of them. In other words, he is saying 
that Arjuna’s speech is not worthy of a reasoned response because 
it is the product of emotional turmoil rather than logical analysis.
Verses 4–9: Arjuna again refuses to fight
4.	
Arjuna said: O Madhusudana, how can I employ my 
arrows in fighting with Bhishma and with Drona on 
the field of battle? They are worthy of my worship, O 
slayer of the foe.
5.	
It would be far better to refrain from killing such 
noble-minded teachers and to live in this world by 
begging for our food. Our teachers are desirous of 
wealth, but if we kill them the rewards we would 
enjoy would be tainted with blood.
6.	
Nor do we know which would be better for us, 
defeating them or being defeated by them, for after 
killing the sons of Dhritarashtra, now positioned 
before us, we would have no wish to live.
7.	
My very existence is afflicted by problems caused by 
weakness and my mind is confused about dharma. 
So now I am asking you which is the best course to 
adopt. Answer me clearly for I am now your student. 
Instruct me for I have surrendered to your guidance.
8.	
I cannot see anything that will dispel the grief that is 
drying up my senses, not even attaining a prosperous 
kingdom on earth without any rival, nor even gaining 
lordship over the gods.
9.	
Samjaya said: After speaking in this way to Hrishikesha, 
Gudakesha said to Govinda, ‘I will not fight.’ He then 
fell silent, O destroyer of the foe.
Despite Krishna’s rebuke and the implication that he is a coward, 
still Arjuna cannot be roused to battle. His words may be based 
on emotion rather than reason but it is going to take more than 
an emotional response to change his mind. In verses 4–6, he 
repeats the point he has made earlier that a victory achieved by 

--- PAGE 43 ---
Chapter 2
35
slaying the sons of Dhritarashtra and the elders of the family 
will not bring them any sort of happiness. They are fighting the 
war to win back their rightful inheritance so that they can live 
happily in a state of prosperity, but a victory gained in this way 
will not achieve that goal.
In verse 7, he turns again to the question of dharma, which he 
has also covered in Chapter 1, but here he admits that he does 
not really understand what his dharmic duty is; moreover, he 
admits that the rationality of his thoughts has been undermined 
by the intensity of his emotions. So now he turns to Krishna 
for a proper explanation of his dilemma in relation to dharma, 
although he cannot see any way that he can be persuaded that 
he should fight.
Verses 10–30: The atman, the inner self
10.	 With a slight smile, Hrishikesha then spoke these 
words to the lamenting Arjuna whilst they were situ-
ated in the space between the two armies.
11.	
The Lord said: Whilst grieving for those who should not 
be lamented over, you speak words that appear wise. But 
learned men grieve for neither the living nor the dead.
12.	 There was never a time when I did not exist, nor you, 
nor these lords of men; nor shall any of us cease to 
exist in the future. 
13.	
Even as the embodied soul present in this body goes 
through childhood, youth, and then old age, in the 
same way it then acquires a different body. One who 
is wise is not confused about this.
14.	
It is contact of the senses with their objects, Kaunteya, 
which leads to sensations of heat and cold, pleasure 
and pain. Being impermanent, such sensations come 
and go and so you must learn to endure them, Bharata.
15.	
If these sensations do not distract a person, O best 
of men, and if he can remain equal in sorrow and 
happiness, then such a wise person gains the state 
of immortality.

--- PAGE 44 ---
Bhagavad-gita
36
16.	 That which is unreal never comes into being and that 
which is real never ceases to be. Those who perceive 
the truth can recognise this conclusion concerning 
these two.
17.	
You must understand this to be the indestructible 
principle that pervades this whole world. No one 
can bring about the destruction of this unchanging 
principle.
18.	 This eternal embodied soul is indestructible and 
beyond comprehension. The bodies it inhabits, how-
ever, are said to be finite. Therefore fight, O Bharata.
19.	
Neither the person who thinks this self is the killer 
nor he who thinks it is killed properly understands it, 
for it does not kill and it cannot be killed.
20.	 It is never born and it never dies. It is existing now 
and it will never cease to exist. It is unborn, eternal, 
everlasting, and most ancient. It is not killed when the 
body is killed.
21.	
How can a person who properly understands this as 
indestructible, eternal, unborn, and without decay 
cause the death of anyone or kill anyone? What will 
he cause the death of? What will he kill?
22.	 Just as a person casts aside old clothes and puts on 
other ones that are new, so the embodied soul casts 
aside old bodies and accepts other new ones.
23.	 Weapons cannot cut it, fire cannot burn it, water 
cannot make it wet, and wind cannot dry it. 
24.	 This cannot be cut, it cannot be burned, and it cannot 
be moistened or dried. It is eternal, all-pervasive, fixed, 
immovable, and everlasting.
25.	
It is said that it is imperceptible and inconceivable and 
it is not subject to transformation. Understanding it in 
this way, you should lament no more.
26.	 And even if you think that it is born repeatedly and 
repeatedly dies, still you should not lament over it, O 
mighty one.

--- PAGE 45 ---
Chapter 2
37
27.	
For one who has been born death is certain and 
for one who has died birth is certain. Therefore 
you should not lament over something that cannot 
be averted.
28.	 The beginning of living beings is unknown, their 
interim stage is visible and their end is again 
unknown. So why should there be any lamentation 
over this?
29.	 One person sees it as wonderful, another person may 
speak of it as wonderful and yet another person may 
come to hear about it as wonderful; but even after 
hearing about it no one truly understands it.
30.	 This embodied soul present within the bodies of all 
beings is eternal and can never be killed. Therefore 
you should not lament for any living being.
Here, then, we encounter the first of Krishna’s teachings in 
response to Arjuna’s plight. It is, moreover, the first teaching 
that the Bhagavad-gita presents to its readers, although this is 
not a theme that Krishna pursues in any great detail after this 
initial exposition. 
The essence of Krishna’s argument
Krishna’s first argument to Arjuna rests on the traditional Hindu 
understanding of the soul as being distinct from the body and 
it is no surprise to find quotations from the Katha Upanishad 
included here, as the transcendent nature of the atman, the inner 
self, is the main topic of that Upanishad’s discourse. Verses 19 
and 20 are both taken from the Katha Upanishad (although the 
wording is changed slightly) and are used to demonstrate that the 
death of the body does not entail the death of the true self. (As 
an aside, it is interesting to note that 2.19 of the Bhagavad-gita 
is virtually a quotation of 2.19 of the Katha Upanishad; this may 
be a coincidence but I like to think it is done deliberately).
So Krishna’s argument here is a relatively simple one. Arjuna 
is lamenting because he cannot bear the thought of the death 
of his relatives and teachers, but one who possesses the higher 

--- PAGE 46 ---
Bhagavad-gita
38
knowledge taught by the Upanishads will know that the true self 
will not die. Therefore Arjuna should give up his sorrow over 
the death of family members, realising that for the true self there 
is no death. When the body is destroyed, the soul within moves 
on and enters another bodily form, just as we discard our old 
worn out clothes and put on new ones. However much the body 
may be afflicted by physical circumstances, the eternal principle 
that is the true self remains untouched. Therefore Arjuna should 
understand that the deaths he will cause on the battlefield do not 
pertain to the true self and he should give up his grief.
This then is the main thrust of Krishna’s argument at this 
point as he begins to reason with Arjuna. Within this passage, 
however, there are specific verses that different Hindu acharyas 
have used to support their own religious teachings. In comment-
ing on verse 12, Ramanujacharya argues that because Krishna 
says that the self will never cease to be, the position of Advaita 
cannot be sustained. The Advaita philosophy insists that liberation 
from rebirth occurs when one realises one’s own identity with 
Brahman and when individual existence ends as a result of that 
realisation. Here, however, Krishna seems to be suggesting that 
the individual existence of the soul will never end. As might 
be expected, Shankaracharya does not accept this reading and 
suggests that the verse should not be over-interpreted or used as 
the basis for philosophical discussion. Krishna is speaking con-
ventionally here, beginning his discourse to Arjuna, and the only 
point he is trying to make concerns the eternality of the soul.
Verse 16, on the other hand, might be used to support the 
Advaitic argument that the world is unreal. Krishna is differenti-
ating here between the eternal spiritual principle and the material 
embodiment, but in doing so he uses the word sat to designate 
the soul, and asat to refer to the body. Sat and asat are often used 
in the sense of real and unreal and so the verse could be taken 
as supporting Shankara’s position that the variegated world we 
inhabit is an illusion created by ignorance, for everything is 
Brahman. However, Ramanuja and others contend that here sat 
and asat should be understood as meaning temporary and eternal. 

--- PAGE 47 ---
Chapter 2
39
These are rather subtle arguments and for our purposes we can 
note that the main point here is to understand the existence 
within the body of a higher self, a spiritual entity that survives 
the death of the body and then transmigrates into another bodily 
form. Krishna is here explaining the conventional doctrine of 
reincarnation, which is a major feature of Hindu, Buddhist, and 
Jain religious teaching. Because death pertains only to the body 
and not to the true self, Arjuna can engage in battle without 
worrying about the consequences.
We might like to pause for a moment at this point and reflect 
on whether the argument Krishna presents here is morally accept-
able. At this stage, one might feel a bit uneasy about the Gita’s 
position, but of course this is just the first point that is made 
and it has to be taken within the wider context of the text as a 
whole. Moving quickly on, Krishna now offers Arjuna a second 
argument to convince him that he should fight.
Verses 31–38: The dharma of a kshatriya
31.	
Considering the nature of your personal dharma you 
should not hesitate. For a kshatriya there is nothing 
superior to fighting in accordance with dharma.
32.	
Kshatriyas who encounter a war of this type become 
joyful, Partha; it comes unsought and yet opens the 
door to heaven.
33.	 And if you do not engage in this dharmic battle then 
you will destroy both your personal dharma and your 
honour, and you will accumulate sin.
34.	 Then people will always speak of your dishonour; and 
for a person who has achieved renown dishonour is 
worse than death.
35.	
The great chariot warriors will think that you have 
left the battle due to fear. Those who had previously 
thought highly of you will now hold you in contempt.
36.	 Your enemies will speak many insulting words about 
you, condemning your prowess. What could be more 
painful than that?

--- PAGE 48 ---
Bhagavad-gita
40
37.	
Either you will die and reach heaven or else you will 
conquer and rule the earth. Therefore arise, Kaunteya, 
with your resolve set on battle.
38.	
Become equal-minded towards happiness and distress, 
gain and loss, victory and defeat and then engage 
yourself in battle. You will not acquire sin by acting in 
this way.
Krishna’s second argument
We will recall that in Chapter 1, when Arjuna lost his resolve, he 
expressed a fear of sin and its consequences in terms of his future 
rebirth. He suggested that by killing the elders of the family, 
the dharma of the family would be destroyed and, as a result of 
this sinful act, he would be condemned to hell. Here, Krishna 
responds to that argument by insisting that waging war is indeed 
Arjuna’s dharma. Arjuna is a kshatriya, a member of the social class 
whose religious duty is to govern society and to wage war against 
invaders and wrongdoers. Hence, for Arjuna, waging war is a 
religious duty, his dharma. In verses 32 and 37, Krishna responds 
to Arjuna’s fear of sin by insisting that because waging war is 
kshatriya-dharma, he will, in fact, gain great merit by engaging in 
this type of action, and this merit will elevate him to the heaven 
of the gods after death. This view is confirmed elsewhere in the 
Mahabharata where we are shown Duryodhana, Shakuni, and 
Duhshasana elevated to heaven after death, not because of their 
virtue but because they fought and died in battle in accordance 
with the dharma of their social class. 
This, then, is Krishna’s second argument. Arjuna must fight 
because his social dharma, his varna-dharma, obliges him to do 
so. He will not be guilty of any sin by executing his dharma; 
rather, he will gain rewards both in this world and in the world 
to come. Krishna also warns Arjuna that if he leaves the field of 
battle, no one will applaud him for his virtue. His enemies will 
despise him as a weak-minded coward who did not have the 
courage to fight. And for a kshatriya, dishonour of that type is 
unbearable. This short passage is confirmed at the end of the Gita, 

--- PAGE 49 ---
Chapter 2
41
in Chapter 18, where Krishna lists the duties of the four varnas or 
social classes. The list of kshatriya duties (18.43) includes yuddhe 
apalayanam, never fleeing from battle, and so Arjuna is obliged 
to stand and fight because it is his dharma as a kshatriya to do so.
As with the insistence on the eternality of the soul, the empha-
sis on social dharma is not one of the Bhagavad-gita’s main ideas 
and should not be taken in isolation from its other teachings. 
Here, Krishna is providing us with an introduction to the main 
idea of these opening chapters, the concept of karma-yoga. This 
entails the performance of action without any desire for per-
sonal gain. Here, Krishna is briefly explaining to Arjuna what 
his duty is; now he will go on to explain the consciousness of 
detachment with which that action should be performed. So 
rather than taking this passage out of context as an insistence 
on varna-dharma, we should probably see it as an introduction to 
the main teaching on karma-yoga. 
It is this big idea that Krishna turns to now, though he has some 
more introductory words to speak before giving the full explanation.
Verse 39–41: An introduction to karma-yoga
39.	
I have spoken so far on the basis of Samkhya but now 
listen to this concerning Buddhi Yoga, the yoga of the 
intellect. When you engage in action on the basis of 
this understanding (buddhya) you will free yourself 
from the bondage of action.
40.	 There is nothing to lose in this attempt and neither 
can there be any failure, for even a slight engagement 
in this dharma frees one from great danger.
41.	
Here the resolute intelligence becomes fixed on one 
point, O child of the Kurus, but the understandings 
of those who are irresolute have many branches and 
diversify without limit.
In these three verses, Krishna is introducing the next topic and 
explaining the effectiveness of the type of yoga he will now 
explain to Arjuna. There are, however, a few points that we 
should note here.

--- PAGE 50 ---
Bhagavad-gita
42
In verse 39, Krishna says that the teachings he has given up 
until this point are in relation to Samkhya. Samkhya is one of the 
main branches of Hindu religious philosophy; it seeks to analyse 
the elements of matter and then to demonstrate that the soul is 
different from matter. So here, we should probably understand 
that Krishna is referring to the teachings on the soul he gave 
earlier in the chapter rather than those on kshatriya-dharma he 
has just presented. 
He then gives the title ‘Buddhi-yoga’ to the teachings he is now 
going to impart. The word buddhi means ‘intellect’ or ‘under-
standing’, but the teachings that follow from this point are related 
to karma-yoga, the yoga consisting of desireless action. Hence, we 
must conclude that buddhi-yoga and karma-yoga are one and the 
same. Perhaps karma-yoga is here designated as buddhi-yoga because 
the focus is on the intellect detaching itself from selfish desire, 
thereby transforming the consciousness that motivates us to act.
Here, we might also note Krishna’s insistence that there can be 
no failure in the spiritual endeavour, only degrees of success. No 
spiritual achievement is ever lost or wasted. This point is further 
explained at the end of Chapter 6, where Krishna tells us that 
even if one engaged in yoga practice does not achieve complete 
success, he can carry on from the same point of achievement in 
a future life.
Verses 42–46: Criticism of the vedic religion
42.	 Persons lacking in insight who are attached to the 
religion of the Vedas speak in flowery language. ‘There 
is nothing more than this’, they say.
43.	
Filled with desires and seeking the heavenly worlds, 
they advocate many different types of rituals, which 
lead to a higher birth as the result of that action. Plea-
sure and power are the goals they seek.
44.	 The resolute form of intelligence existing in the 
state of samadhi can never arise for such persons who 
remain attached to pleasure and power and whose 
minds are carried away by such desires.

--- PAGE 51 ---
Chapter 2
43
45.	
The Vedas are concerned with the three gunas but you 
must become free from the three gunas, Arjuna. One 
who is self-possessed transcends duality, always adheres 
to the quality of sattva and has no interest in gain or 
protection of what has been gained.
46.	 As with the purpose served by a reservoir of water 
when the whole area is flooded with water, so it is 
with the purpose of the Vedas for a brahmin who is 
enlightened by knowledge.
This is a very interesting passage from the Bhagavad-gita, as 
it contains a fairly strident criticism of the Vedic religion and 
the Vedic ritual practices. Two questions arise here: Why does 
Krishna take this attitude towards Vedic ritual? And why does 
he include this instruction at this point in the Gita? Let us take 
these in turn.
We must be aware that the Bhagavad-gita is not ‘anti-Vedic’. 
The criticism made here is not of Vedic ritual per se but of ritual 
that is performed on the basis of selfish desire and is hence a 
materialistic endeavour. When the religion of the Veda is pur-
sued in this manner, it is related to the three qualities of matter 
(gunas): sattva, rajas, and tamas. It is not dedicated to spiritual 
goals. Krishna is especially critical of those who perform such 
materially motivated rituals and claim that this is all there is to 
religious life. In other words, they themselves condemn other 
forms of religion based on spiritual goals by stating, na anyad 
asti, there is nothing other than this. The Gita may be critiquing 
the Mimamsa philosophy here, which does indeed contend that 
the Vedic religion is based on ritual alone and that the ritual is 
performed in order to gain defined goals. Here, we also find a 
clear resonance of Shankaracharya’s great debate with the acharya 
of the Mimamsaka school named Mandana Mishra. The Veda 
consists of a karma-kanda portion, which emphasises ritual lead-
ing to prosperity in this world, and a jñana-kanda, consisting of 
the Upanishads that teach spiritual wisdom leading to liberation 
from rebirth. Here Krishna is not denying the Veda, as the 
Buddhists do, but is criticising those who emphasise only the 

--- PAGE 52 ---
Bhagavad-gita
44
karma-kanda portion and deny the value of the jñana-kanda with 
the words na anyad asti. It is very interesting to note that this 
is exactly the position taken by Mandana Mishra in the debate 
with Shankaracharya.
Why then does Krishna include this passage at this point in 
his discourse where he is about to introduce the buddhi- or kar-
ma-yoga? I think the answer to this question is that he wishes to 
draw a clear distinction between karma and karma-yoga. Karma 
means any type of action, but specifically ritual action per-
formed in order to gain a desirable result. The Vedic ritual falls 
into this category and it is hence a material action. Karma-yoga 
may externally appear to be identical to karma in terms of the 
action performed. The key difference is in the buddhi or con-
sciousness that is the basis for that action. In the case of karma it 
is selfish desire, but in the case of karma-yoga, the same action is 
performed without selfish desire. Duryodhana and Arjuna both 
perform the same action on the battlefield, but Duryodhana 
is involved in karma whilst Arjuna, acting without desire, is 
urged to perform karma-yoga. So here, in his criticism of ritual, 
Krishna is stating from the outset that the karma-yoga he is about 
to reveal is entirely different from the karma he here condemns, 
though they may appear to be identical in terms of the physical 
actions undertaken.
Now, with the preliminaries complete, we can at last enter 
into the discussion of karma-yoga, which is the main teaching 
offered by the Bhagavad-gita in its earlier chapters.
Verses 47–53: An outline of karma-yoga
47.	 You only have a right to the action itself and never to 
the fruits of that action. Do not make the rewards of 
action your motive and do not develop any attach-
ment for avoiding action.
48.	 Situated in yoga, perform your duties whilst giving 
up all attachments, Dhanamjaya. Remain equal in 
success and failure for such equanimity is what is 
meant by yoga.

--- PAGE 53 ---
Chapter 2
45
49.	 Action alone (karma) is greatly inferior to Buddhi 
Yoga, Dhanamjaya. Seek shelter in the intellect (bud-
dhau); those motivated by the fruits of action are 
petty-minded.
50.	
By focusing the intellect in this way (buddhi-yukto) 
one sets aside both righteous and unrighteous deeds. 
Therefore engage yourself in this yoga for yoga is the 
true art of performing action.
51.	
Wise men who engage in the yoga of the intellect 
abandon the fruits that are born of action. Free from 
the bondage of rebirth, they attain a position that has 
no blemish.
52.	 When your intellect breaks free of the dense thicket 
of illusion you will reach a state of indifference for 
what should be heard and what has been heard in the 
past (shruta). 
53.	
Your intellect becomes perplexed by the Shruti, but 
when it remains steady and fixed in the state of 
Samadhi, without any wavering, you will then have 
achieved success in yoga.
This is quite a short passage, but it does set out the essential 
principles of the Bhagavad-gita’s doctrine of karma-yoga, here 
again referred to as buddhi-yoga.
Buddhi-yoga as described in verses 47–53
The practice of buddhi-yoga consists of the performance of proper 
action in a mood of complete detachment, without any desire 
for personal gain and being unmoved by the success or failure 
of the action undertaken. It is interesting to note how verse 49 
makes a direct comparison between karma and karma-(buddhi-)
yoga, thus continuing the theme of the previous passage that 
condemned karma in the form of ritual actions.
What does ‘prescribed action’ in verse 47 mean?
One must presume that ‘prescribed action’ means action in 
accordance with one’s personal dharma. Here we seem to have a 

--- PAGE 54 ---
Bhagavad-gita
46
reference to the discussion of kshatriya-dharma contained in verses 
31–37, but now this is placed into the context of buddhi-yoga. 
Arjuna should perform his kshatriya-dharma by fighting, but he 
must divorce himself from the selfish form of consciousness with 
which kshatriya-dharma is performed by Duryodhana and others.
What is the goal attained by the 
practice of buddhi-yoga?
In verses 50 and 51, we are told that those who follow the path of 
buddhi-yoga become free of both virtue and sin (sukrita and dush-
krita). In other words, they break free from the control of the law 
of karma that keeps us bound to this world. This is referred to in 
verse 51. Having freed ourselves from the domain of karma and 
rebirth through this practice, we then attain a padam anamayam, 
a position that is free from any blemish or contamination. Of 
course, the precise meaning of this phrase can be interpreted in 
different ways, but it is clear that the practice of buddhi-yoga is 
designed to lead a person to moksha, liberation from rebirth. So 
again we see a fundamental difference between karma in the 
form of Vedic ritual and karma-(buddhi-)yoga, which is a form of 
religious practice aimed at achieving release from rebirth. It is 
hence a type of moksha-dharma.
Attitudes towards the veda  
as expressed in the Bhagavad-gita
In line with the attitude of the previous passage, verses 52 and 
53 suggest that the practice of buddhi-yoga takes the practitioner 
beyond the teachings of the shruti or Veda. Here, one must 
presume that Krishna is referring to the karma-kanda or ritual 
portion and is showing that buddhi-yoga belongs to the jñana-kanda 
revealed by the Upanishads. And, in fact, the opening verses of 
the Isha Upanishad do seem to refer to the same idea of desireless 
action the Gita is advocating here.
Now Krishna expands on the initial idea of the buddhi-yoga, 
responding to a question from Arjuna by explaining the type 
of consciousness that should be assumed in order to practise it 

--- PAGE 55 ---
Chapter 2
47
effectively. It is noteworthy that Gandhi once wrote that these 
verses were ‘inscribed on the tablet of my heart’, claiming that 
all his activities in the area of politics and social reform were, for 
him, a part of his practice of karma-yoga.
Verses 54–72: The characteristics of 
one who performs buddhi-yoga
54.	 Arjuna said: What is the defining feature of a person 
whose realisation is steady and who remains firm 
in this state of samadhi, Keshava? How does such a 
steady-minded person speak? How does he sit? How 
does he move? 
55.	
The Lord said: When a person sets aside all the desires 
running through his mind, Partha, and satisfies himself 
in the self alone he is then described as one whose 
wisdom is steady.
56.	 When the mind does not grieve over life’s sorrows, 
when a person remains untouched by the joys of life 
and free from passion, fear, and anger he is described 
as a sage whose understanding is steady.
57.	
When a person has no affection for any object at 
all and feels neither joy nor loathing when he gains 
desirable and unwanted results, then his wisdom is 
firmly established.
58.	 When a person withdraws all his senses from their 
objects, like a tortoise withdrawing its limbs, then his 
wisdom is firmly established. 
59.	 The objects of pleasure cannot touch the embodied 
soul when it abstains from them. Although one can 
restrict one’s inclination in this way the attraction still 
remains, but after perceiving the Supreme one com-
pletely renounces such attraction. 
60.	 The agitating senses can forcibly carry away the mind 
of even a perceptive person who makes the proper 
endeavours, Kaunteya
61.	
Restraining all these senses, one engaged in this 

--- PAGE 56 ---
Bhagavad-gita
48
practice should remain dedicated to me. When 
he has his senses under control then his wisdom is 
firmly established.
62.	 When a person thinks about the objects of the senses, 
attachment for them inevitably arises. Due to that 
attachment desire appears and from desire anger 
comes into being.
63.	 From anger comes delusion and as a result of that 
delusion one’s thinking is degraded. When thinking 
is degraded one’s intelligence is destroyed and when 
intelligence is destroyed a person is lost.
64.	 But one who possesses self-control can move amongst 
the sense objects using senses that are free of desire 
and loathing and are directed by his will alone. Such a 
person attains a state of absolute tranquillity.
65.	
In that state of tranquillity all his sufferings disappear. 
And when one’s mind is thus at peace the realisation 
(buddhi) then becomes steady.
66.	 But there can be no realisation for one who does not 
engage in this practice and indeed no proper engage-
ment of the mind. Without engaging the mind prop-
erly there is no peace and how can there be happiness 
for one who is not at peace?
67.	 Whichever of the roaming senses the mind becomes 
attached to will carry away a person’s understanding, 
just as the wind carries away a boat on the waters.
68.	 Therefore, O mighty one, only if a person completely 
draws back his senses from their objects is his wisdom 
firmly established.
69.	 One who practices this restraint is awake when it is 
night for all living beings. And that period in which 
living beings are awake is night for the perceptive sage.
70.	 Just as rivers flow into the sea, which is always full 
and remains steady and immovable, so all these desires 
flow into such a person. It is he who attains peace, 
not one who seeks to fulfil those desires.

--- PAGE 57 ---
Chapter 2
49
71.	 Giving up all desires such a person moves through life 
without attachment. He has no sense of ‘mine’ or ‘I’; it 
is he who attains peace.
72.	 This is the transcendental state, Partha, and on reach-
ing such a position one is no longer deluded. If one 
can remain situated in this state of consciousness even 
at the time of death then one attains brahma nirvana.
The characteristics of a person engaging in buddhi-yoga
The main point that Krishna emphasises throughout the passage 
is that the yogin should renounce his desires for material pleasure. 
This is the vital difference between karma and karma-yoga; the 
action is the same, but the karma-yogin acts without selfish desire. 
Verses 56 and 57 further explain that such a person remains undis-
turbed by the vicissitudes of fortune; he is not elated when things 
go well and not downcast over the misfortunes that inevitably 
befall us in life. He remains always aloof from the fluctuations of 
fortune, hence free from passion, from fear and from anger. His 
senses are still active, and so desires still arise in his heart, but 
he has the intellectual strength to resist those desires and act on 
the basis of a higher consciousness. He is the master of his own 
being and not the servant of the uncontrolled senses; here again, 
we might note the teachings of the Katha Upanishad, which 
gives the example of the chariot with the intellect as the driver 
and the horses as the senses that must be brought under control.
The significance of verses 59 and 61
Verse 59 indicates that control of the senses and selfish desires 
is made possible by the perception of something higher than 
this world. This can be interpreted as some form of spiritual 
realisation or experience or could just be the recognition of a 
higher goal in life. The Gita just says param drishtva, which means 
‘seeing something higher’. However, the word rasa, meaning 
taste, is also used here, and this does indicate that restraint of 
the senses becomes possible when one starts to experience the 
joy of spiritual realisation. In verse 61, Krishna uses the phrase 

--- PAGE 58 ---
Bhagavad-gita
50
mat-parah, meaning dedicated to me, to describe the way in 
which the practitioner should perform buddhi-yoga. The reference 
that Krishna makes here to himself is something new and is a 
forerunner of the ideas on bhakti, devotion to God, that appear 
in later chapters. Later on we will see how karma-yoga or desire-
less action is brought into the realm of bhakti and represented as 
being action performed as devotion to Krishna. At this point, 
however, this idea is only hinted at in this verse. Shankaracharya 
consistently regards Krishna as identical to the atman, the inner 
self; hence, he interprets this verse as meaning that the karma-yogin 
is dedicated to gaining knowledge of the atman and its identity 
with Brahman, the ultimate reality.
The difference between karma and karma-yoga
Verse 69 again reminds us of the contrast between Arjuna and 
Duryodhana. To an observer of the battle, they may appear to 
be acting in an identical manner, but the difference between 
karma and karma-yoga is as dramatic as that between night and 
day. One type of person moves through the world of desire, 
sensual pleasure and material gain. For the karma-yogin, this is 
night, for he does not operate in this sphere. He explores the 
domain of the spirit, seeking to achieve spiritual realisation by 
renouncing materialistic aspirations. For one whose life is ded-
icated to material acquisition, this domain of spiritual pursuits 
is like night, for he is not active there.
What goal does the karma-yogin gain?
The goal achieved by this type of spiritual endeavour is described 
in verse 71 as shanti, or absolute tranquillity, absolute peace of 
mind – sa shantim adhigacchati. Those active in the material domain 
of gain and loss suffer constant anxieties, but a person who seeks 
the spiritual domain attains transcendence and tranquillity. The 
final verse of the chapter, verse 72, concludes with the words brah-
ma-nirvanam ricchati or ‘he reaches the brahma-nirvana’. Now the 
precise meaning of brahma-nirvana is rather difficult to determine; 
we might note the connection here with the Buddhist notion of 

--- PAGE 59 ---
Chapter 2
51
nirvana as the final goal, though we cannot say whether there is 
any direct influence. However, the phrase is clearly a reference 
to the cessation of worldly existence and entry into the spiritual 
domain that is Brahman. So again, it is made clear to us that the 
teachings here are about moksha, how to gain complete liberation 
from the cycle of suffering and rebirth.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 2
A lot of ground has been covered in this second chapter, and we 
might summarise the contents, point by point, as follows:
•	Though rebuked by Krishna for a lack of manliness, Arjuna 
continues to assert his unwillingness to fight in the battle.
•	 Krishna then speaks of the eternality of the true self in all 
beings. Even though the warriors will die in battle, it is 
only the body that is ended, not the embodied soul.
•	 Krishna reminds Arjuna that as a kshatriya he is bound by 
his dharma to fight in battle and never withdraw.
•	Vedic ritual performed purely for material gain is criticised. 
This is karma.
•	 However, ritual action should not be given up and for 
Arjuna ritual action is the action ordained by the rules of 
dharma. Hence, he must fight in battle. However, he must 
do so without any desire for personal gain. This desireless 
action is designated as buddhi-yoga.
•	 One who engages in buddhi-yoga must be detached from 
material desires and remain aloof from emotional attach-
ment to success or failure in the action he performs. When 
action is performed in this detached manner, one is free of 
the law of karma and attains the spiritual goal of liberation 
from rebirth.
•	 Now, we can proceed to the third chapter, in which Krishna 
expands on the ideas he has introduced here.

--- PAGE 60 ---

--- PAGE 61 ---

53
Chapter 3 
I
n Chapter 3, Krishna expands upon the idea of karma-yoga 
he introduced in the second half of Chapter 2. This further 
explanation is called for because it is clear from Arjuna’s 
opening remarks that he has not yet fully grasped how detach-
ment from the world can be reconciled with engaging in acts 
of violence. Is it possible to reach this state of detachment 
whilst remaining engaged in the worldly actions dictated by 
one’s social dharma?
Verses 1–2: Arjuna’s inquiry
1.	
Arjuna said: If you regard realisation as being superior 
to action then why are you urging me to engage in a 
form of action (karma) that is so dreadful?
2.	
It seems that you are confusing my understanding 
by this equivocal instruction. Please tell me conclu-
sively of the one course by which I can obtain the 
greatest benefit.
Here, Arjuna admits frankly that Krishna’s teachings in Chapter 2 
have left him confused. If Krishna regards buddhi (the intellect) as 
superior to karma (action), then why does he urge him to engage 
in action of the most extreme kind? It seems that Arjuna regards 
worldly action as standing in opposition to spiritual realisation, 
designated by the word buddhi. Krishna has tried to explain how 
they can be reconciled in his discourse on buddhi-yoga, but Arjuna 
has not quite understood the point. The debate that will now 
take place is a significant one. The religious ideas of Buddhists 
and Jains insist that full spiritual realisation can be gained only 

--- PAGE 62 ---
Bhagavad-gita
54
if a person renounces the worldly life for the life of a renunci-
ant. For this reason, Buddhist monks still live in large monastic 
communities where they can remain aloof from worldly con-
cerns and concentrate on their personal spiritual progress. The 
Bhagavad-gita is not content with this view, not least because it 
believes that a person should maintain a concern for the affairs 
of the world, and so it argues that renunciation is a state of mind 
and does not depend on living in a state of isolation from human 
society. This is clearly another feature of the doctrine of buddhi- 
or karma-yoga, and it is one that Krishna will now consider in 
more detail as a response to Arjuna’s question.
Verses 3–8: What is renunciation?
3.	
The Lord said: O sinless one, I have already alluded to 
a twofold system that exists in this world. For Sam-
khyas it is by the yoga of knowledge (jñana-yoga) and 
for yogins it is by the yoga of action (karma-yoga).
4.	
A person does not gain freedom from action simply 
by ceasing to act and he cannot reach the ultimate 
state of perfection by renunciation alone.
5.	
No one can remain still without performing any 
action, not even for a moment. Everyone is helplessly 
engaged in some form of action by the gunas that are 
born out of prakriti (matter).
6.	
One who restricts his organs of action but contin-
ually dwells on the objects of the senses within his 
mind is a deluded soul. Such a person is referred to as 
a hypocrite.
7.	
But one who continues to act whilst controlling the 
senses with the mind, Arjuna, using his organs of 
action to perform karma-yoga without any attachment, 
is certainly superior.
8.	
You should continue to perform your prescribed 
duties, for performing action is superior to refraining 
from action. You cannot even sustain your bodily 
functions without acting.

--- PAGE 63 ---
Chapter 3 
55
I would say that this passage is directed against those who say 
that renunciation of material desires is possible only if one with-
draws from the world to become either a wandering sadhu or 
a monk living in a monastic community. Wherever one lives 
action must be performed for one cannot live without acting. 
And one may restrain and regulate one’s activities by refraining 
from worldly action, but if one’s mind still dwells on the objects 
of desire then there is no real renunciation, for it is the state of 
one’s consciousness that is more important than physical action. 
Verse 6 seems to refer to one who renounces the world physically 
but remains dominated by material desires. As well as the more 
obvious forms of desire for sensual pleasure, these can be of a 
more subtle nature such as desire for the fame and prestige that 
often come to religious leaders.
Verse 7 refers to one who remains active within the world but 
does not seek to enjoy the objects of the senses. Here Krishna 
refers to this type of practice as karma-yoga rather than buddhi-yoga, 
though there is no suggestion of any difference in terms of the 
way it is undertaken as both consist of performing one’s duties 
in the world without desire for personal gain. Krishna clearly 
considers that the karma-yogin who lives in the world is in a 
superior position spiritually to the monk who has renounced 
the world but still nurtures material desires. So the message 
here seems to be that it is better not to physically renounce 
the world but to cultivate a mood of inner renunciation whilst 
remaining active in the world. This view certainly marks a 
distinction between Hindu and Buddhist teaching on how to 
gain liberation from rebirth.
Verses 9–16: The vedic ritual and karma-yoga
9.	
Except where action is performed in the execution 
of yajña, this world remains in the bondage of action. 
Remaining free of attachment, Kaunteya, you should 
therefore perform action for that purpose alone.
10.	
In the beginning, after creating living beings along 
with yajña, Prajapati said to them: You will flourish by 

--- PAGE 64 ---
Bhagavad-gita
56
means of this ritual; this will be the cow that grants all 
your desires.
11.	
You should sustain the gods in this way and the gods 
will then sustain you. Sustaining each other in this 
way, you will achieve the highest benefit.
12.	
Sustained by yajña, the gods will bestow upon you 
all the food you may desire. One who consumes the 
foods given by the gods without making offerings to 
them is certainly a thief.
13.	
Righteous people who consume food left after a yajña 
are freed from all blemishes. But wicked people who 
cook just for themselves consume only sin.
14.	
Living beings exist on food and food is produced due 
to rain. The rain comes as a result of yajña and yajña is 
performed by ritual action.
15.	
You should understand that ritual action is derived 
from the Veda (Brahma) and the Veda appears from 
the akshara (undecaying). Hence the all-pervasive 
Brahman is always present within the yajña.
16.	
In this world, a malicious person who delights only in 
the senses, and does not perpetuate the turning of the 
wheel thus set in motion, certainly lives a worthless life.
This passage makes an interesting contrast with the apparent 
criticism of Vedic ritual we encountered in Chapter 2 (verses 
42–45). Here Krishna insists that the Vedic yajña, the ritual offer-
ing into the sacred fire, must be performed, for the welfare of 
the world is dependent on the ritual. The gods are nourished by 
the offerings made into the sacred fire and when the gods are 
pleased in this way they in turn supply all the necessities of life 
to human beings on earth. In understanding the difference of 
perspective between this passage and 2.42–45, we must note again 
the distinction between karma and karma-yoga. The ritual actions 
condemned previously were karma in the sense that they were 
performed by selfish-minded individuals desirous of personal 
gain. Here yajña is to be performed not on the basis of selfish 
motivations but for the welfare of the entire world. And this is 

--- PAGE 65 ---
Chapter 3 
57
an important feature of karma-yoga. Almost by definition, mok-
sha-dharma involves indifference to world, for the practitioner is 
interested only in breaking free of the world. The Bhagavad-gita, 
however, will not accept that this world is of no importance as 
one seeks the higher goal of liberation. Rather, it offers us a kar-
ma-yoga that reconciles the quest for moksha with a concern for 
life, well-being and prosperity in this sphere of existence. This 
reconciliation of two apparently contradictory goals is certainly 
one of the major contributions to Hindu religious thought made 
by the Bhagavad-gita. Here we can see how the performance 
of the Vedic ritual is transformed into a form of yoga that aims 
at liberation from rebirth; the yajña is to be performed without 
any attachment or desire for personal gain but only as a duty 
that will bring about prosperity, happiness, and well-being for 
the people of the world.
Verses 17–26: Why should a yogin perform rituals?
17.	
But for a person who seeks pleasure in the self alone, 
finds contentment through the self and is fulfilled by 
the self there is no prescribed duty to perform.
18.	 There is nothing for him to gain by either performing 
or renouncing such duties. Nor is there any reason for 
him to be dependent on another living being.
19.	
Remaining always unattached, you should therefore 
perform your prescribed duty. A person who per-
forms such duty without attachment attains the high-
est goal.
20.	 It was solely through the performance of action that 
Janaka and others attained a state of complete perfec-
tion. Just by considering the welfare of the world, you 
should be inspired to act.
21.	 Whatever course of action a superior man pursues, 
lesser persons will follow and the world will accept 
the standard he sets.
22.	 There is no action that I am bound to perform any-
where in the three worlds, nor anything I might need 

--- PAGE 66 ---
Bhagavad-gita
58
that I have not already attained, and yet still I am 
engaged in action.
23.	
For if ever I was to cease from the actions I tirelessly 
perform, all people would follow my path, Partha.
24.	 If I did not perform these duties then these worlds 
would fall into ruin. I would then be the creator of 
chaos and thereby cause harm to living beings.
25.	
People devoid of knowledge perform actions on the 
basis of worldly attachment, Bharata. The wise should 
act in the same way but without attachment, seeking 
the well-being of the world.
26.	 The wise man should not cause any breach in the 
understanding of ignorant people attached to per-
forming action. By acting whilst engaged in his yoga 
discipline he should encourage them to perform all 
their duties.
I have given a question as the heading for this passage: ‘Why 
should a yogin perform rituals?’ Here again, we may recall a 
verse from the second chapter (v. 46) in which Krishna states 
that just as a lake fulfils all the functions of a small pond, so a 
spiritually realised brahmin has achieved all that the Vedic ritual 
can offer. The point made there was that any person who has 
achieved the highest level of spiritual awakening has no further 
need of any ritual that might help those who are less advanced. 
But here we seem to have a different view set forward as Krishna 
suggests that enlightened persons should continue with their 
ritual actions. 
If we consider the reasons given as to why a person who has 
achieved this state of enlightenment should continue to perform 
duties related to this world, we might note the following points. 
In verses 17 and 18, Krishna states quite clearly that a person 
who has realised the atman within his own being has no further 
need to engage in ritual acts such as the Vedic yajña discussed in 
the previous verses. Such a person is described atma-rati (finding 
pleasure in the self), atma-tripta (completely satisfied by the self) 
and atmany … samtushta (fully content within his own being). 

--- PAGE 67 ---
Chapter 3 
59
For the self-realised person, karyam na vidyate (v. 17), there is no 
religious duty that he is required to perform. So here, in fact, 
we get confirmation of the point made earlier in Chapter 2 (v. 
46); the realised soul has no need of any ritual act, for he has 
already achieved the highest religious goal. So why then should 
he continue to perform such rituals?
The first point Krishna makes in response to this question is 
that the enlightened person has nothing to lose by performing 
ritual acts (v. 18). He is already on the level of awakened knowl-
edge and he is not going to fall from that position by continuing 
to act. Because he has achieved the state of self-realisation there 
is nothing that can disturb him; performing or not performing 
ritual action is entirely the same.
Verse 19 seems slightly anomalous because here Krishna pauses 
in his discussion of whether the realised person should perform 
action and returns instead to Arjuna’s position. Arjuna should 
certainly engage in the ritual action of his kshatriya dharma but 
without selfish desire, for this is the karma-yoga that will take 
him to that higher state of consciousness.
It is in verses 20 and 21 that we find the real heart of the issue. 
It is all to do with the well-being of the world. The realised saint 
may have transcended the world through spiritual enlightenment, 
but that does not mean that he should be indifferent to the sit-
uation of the world. Verse 20 cites the example of King Janaka 
(presumably the father of Sita from the Ramayana) who was 
an enlightened sage but continued his kshatriya duty by ruling 
the kingdom. Why did he not live as a renunciant? The answer 
given here is loka-samgraham … sampashyan, it was because he 
was concerned over the welfare of the world, the loka-samgraha. 
Not only did Janaka’s enlightened rule bring benefit to his 
citizens, but his conduct in remaining dedicated to his social duty 
also served as an example to others. So here is another reason. 
Not only does the performance of religious duty bring benefit 
to the world, but its performance also serves as an example to 
others. The mass of the population should not seek to take up 
the renounced lifestyle of the sadhu, for this will not help them 

--- PAGE 68 ---
Bhagavad-gita
60
spiritually, and one who is truly enlightened sets the example 
for others by continuing to perform his or her duty even though 
he has no personal need to do so.
This passage marks an important addition to our understanding 
of the karma-yoga. The performance of social duty as desireless 
action is not just a means by which an individual can make per-
sonal spiritual progress. It is also a means by which individual 
spirituality can be reconciled with ensuring order and prosperity 
in the world; it draws social dharma and moksha-dharma together 
in a unique manner. Kings and other leaders are not to aban-
don their positions and ignore the effect this will have on the 
world. The welfare of the world does matter, and so karma-yoga 
is recommended as the means by which one can pursue personal 
spirituality without causing harm to the world by abandoning 
social responsibilities.
In verses 22 to 24, Krishna refers to himself as an example of 
the principle of karma-yoga. Whether we regard Krishna as the 
Supreme Deity or as an enlightened teacher, there is no reason 
why he should concern himself with a world he is not a part of. 
But still, he is engaged in action. Why? Because he is concerned 
for the well-being of those who live in the world, and if he did 
not act, this well-being would be damaged.
In verses 25 and 26, the teaching of the passage is concluded 
with a further reference to the importance of loka-samgraha, the 
well-being of the world, and a succinct explanation of the kar-
ma-yoga. The external actions performed by the karma-yogin are 
identical to those performed by a person who is absorbed in this 
world; the difference lies in the consciousness and the motive. 
One acts for selfish reasons; this is karma. The other performs 
the same action out of duty alone, without attachment or desire; 
this is karma-yoga.
Verses 27–35: Karma-yoga and spiritual knowledge
27.	 All actions are ultimately performed by the gunas 
inherent in prakriti (matter), but a person whose mind 
is deluded by the sense of ‘I’ thinks, ‘I am the doer.’

--- PAGE 69 ---
Chapter 3 
61
28.	 But one who understands the truth about the dis-
tinction between guna and action, O mighty one, 
understands that it is just one set of gunas acting on 
other gunas. By understanding action in this way he 
remains unattached.
29.	 Those who are confused about the gunas inherent in 
prakriti have attachment for the action generated by 
the gunas. But one who understands all this should 
not disturb such ignorant persons who have only lim-
ited knowledge.
30.	 Casting off all your deeds onto me by fixing your 
mind on the true self, remaining free of desire and 
free of any sense of ‘mine’, you should now fight with 
the emotions banished.
31.	
Persons who are faithful and devoid of envy and who 
always adhere to the teaching I have just revealed are 
released from the effects of action.
32.	
But those who despise this teaching of mine and do 
not adhere to it are deluded in all their wisdom. You 
should know that they are lost souls who are com-
pletely dull-witted.
33.	
Even one who possesses knowledge conducts himself 
in accordance with his nature. Living beings must 
conform to their inherent nature; what can repression 
of one’s nature achieve?
34.	
Desire and aversion are the conditions of the senses in 
relation to objects they perceive. A person must not 
fall under the control of either of these tendencies for 
both are obstacles to him.
35.	
Even though it may have faults, one’s own dharma is 
still superior to accepting the dharma of another, even 
if it be perfectly observed. Death in the performance 
of one’s own dharma is better, for another’s dharma is 
a source of danger.
Here again, we are presented with further discussion around the 
subject of karma-yoga, but in this passage, we see the emphasis 

--- PAGE 70 ---
Bhagavad-gita
62
being shifted slightly away from a simple discourse on desireless 
action towards the spiritual knowledge that is associated with that 
karma-yoga. The passage is rather complex and involves several 
different ideas, and hence it might be useful to summarise what 
is being said here point by point, looking at how it refines the 
previous discourse on karma-yoga.
Verses 27 and 28 discuss exactly what is happening when action 
is performed and show how a person can be detached from the 
results of action – as is essential in the practice of karma-yoga – by 
understanding the truth of action. The conventional view is that 
when action is performed, we consider ourselves the doer and 
the controller of the outcome. Here, however, Krishna suggests 
an alternative view by means of which we can detach ourselves 
from the actions we perform. The Samkhya teachings used by 
the Bhagavad-gita reveal that matter or prakriti is pervaded by 
three inherent qualities, the gunas designated as sattva, rajas, and 
tamas. From the perspective of karma-yoga, a person sees that he 
is not the doer of the action he performs, for in fact action is 
just an interaction of these gunas. Action is a process that takes 
place within the realm of matter. Rather than seeing himself 
as involved in the process of action and thereby feeling attach-
ment for the outcome, the karma-yogin takes up the position of a 
neutral observer of the action he performs and thereby becomes 
detached from the outcome. The instruction here is really about 
how to engage in karma-yoga by becoming a detached observer 
of oneself performing action, rather than identifying oneself as 
the performer of action.
In verse 30, we have a further hint of the relationship between 
karma-yoga and bhakti, devotion to God, a theme that is devel-
oped more fully later in the Bhagavad-gita. Here again there is 
further advice on the techniques of karma-yoga. In performing 
action, one becomes detached emotionally by observing it as an 
interaction of material forces. Now in this verse, one understands 
that all outcomes are determined by the will of God, and this 
understanding further assists the process of becoming detached 
from action.

--- PAGE 71 ---
Chapter 3 
63
Verses 31 and 32 simply describe the differing characteristics 
of those who do and those who do not accept Krishna’s teachings 
on karma-yoga. They also describe the different results these two 
types of person will achieve. Perhaps here we should connect 
the Gita to its context within the Mahabharata and recognise 
a reference to the Pandavas on one side and the Kauravas on 
the other.
In verses 33 to 35, we see another dimension of the doctrines 
of karma-yoga and a reference to the Bhagavad-gita’s ideas on the 
social divisions of varna, which are often interpreted in terms 
of the caste system. The point that Krishna is making here is 
again intimately linked to the doctrine of karma-yoga. It is sug-
gested that every person is born with a predetermined inherent 
nature, known as sva-bhava. How is this predetermined? By the 
actions performed in previous lives that have shaped the inner 
nature with which the soul transmigrates. Hence for the Gita, 
it is not true to say that all human beings are born equal with 
their inner nature like a blank sheet. Each of us is born with a 
specific personal disposition, and it is this inner disposition that 
is reflected in the division of society into four varnas or social 
classes: brahmins, kshatriyas, vaishyas, and shudras. The dharma 
ordained for each of these social classes reflects the inner nature 
of those born into them, and therefore it is regarded as wrong for 
people to change their varna or to abandon their social dharma. 
This of course applies to Arjuna in his present situation; he is 
born as a kshatriya and hence he has the sva-bhava or inherent 
nature of a kshatriya. Therefore, his desire to abandon the battle 
and renounce his duty is perverse and wholly impractical. Verse 
35 is repeated almost verbatim in the eighteenth chapter (v. 47), 
and at this point, the topic is explained in greater detail. Here, 
Arjuna is instructed that he cannot give up his kshatriya dharma 
because kshatriya dharma is a reflection of kshatriya nature and 
a person cannot change his inherent nature. Therefore, one 
should continue to perform one’s own social dharma, but do 
so without desire or attachment, thereby transforming karma 
into karma-yoga.

--- PAGE 72 ---
Bhagavad-gita
64
Verses 36–43: The root cause of wicked action
36.	 Arjuna said: What is it that impels a person to act sin-
fully even though he has no desire to do so, Varshneya, 
compelling him to act in that way as if by force?
37.	
The Lord said: It is desire, it is anger; this arises from 
the guna known as rajas. You should know this as a 
mighty devouring force, a great source of sin; it is the 
enemy in this world.
38.	 As fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror is covered by 
dirt and as an embryo is covered by its membrane, so 
is this world covered by desire.
39.	
Knowledge is covered by this desire, which is there-
fore the great enemy of one who possesses knowledge. 
This enemy in the form of desire, Kaunteya, blazes 
like an insatiable fire.
40.	 The senses, the mind and the intellect are said to be its 
abode. Covering the true knowledge of the embod-
ied being, it thus places it in a state of delusion.
41.	
Therefore you must first regulate the senses, O best 
of the Bharatas, and then conquer this source of sin, 
which destroys both spiritual and practical knowledge.
42.	 They say that the senses are in a superior position and 
that the mind is superior to the senses. The intellect 
stands above the mind, but this is superior even to 
the intellect.
43.	 Thus understanding that which is superior to the 
intellect and making yourself steady by your own self, 
you must defeat this enemy in the form of desire, O 
mighty one, though it is difficult to overcome.
This final passage of Chapter 3 is inaugurated by a further ques-
tion posed by Arjuna relating to the causes of wicked action. It 
is not entirely clear what prompts Arjuna to pose this question 
at this particular point. Perhaps it is Krishna’s reference to the 
faulty performance of dharmic duty, or perhaps it is the idea of a 
person abandoning his own dharma, which could also be regarded 
as wicked action. Anyway, the question is an intriguing one 

--- PAGE 73 ---
Chapter 3 
65
and is related to the idea of karma-yoga, for Krishna has already 
informed us that in practising karma-yoga one must strive to 
become free of selfish desire. 
Arjuna’s question about the root cause of wicked action
The wording of Arjuna’s question is interesting for it indicates 
that people often act wickedly whilst seeking to be virtuous. So 
what is the force which compels people to deviate from the virtue 
they aspire after? Krishna initially gives two answers: kama esha 
krodha esha, it is desire and it is anger, but the subsequent discus-
sion focuses on desire alone. It is the burning desire for sensual 
pleasure that gives rise to selfish actions such as lying, cheating, 
deceiving, stealing, or harming others and if this desire cannot 
be resisted then a person is compelled to engage in acts he knows 
in his heart to be wicked.
The consequence of giving in to desire
In verses 39 and 40, Krishna points out that true knowledge is 
obscured when selfish desire prevails. Knowledge here refers to 
the higher understanding of our spiritual identity, which is the 
key to liberation from rebirth. This knowledge, or jñana, can 
only exist when the covering power of desire is removed.
Overcoming the power of desire
In verse 41, Krishna says that the senses must be brought under 
control, for desire is stimulated by sensual perception, as we 
learned in Chapter 2 (v. 62). In the final two verses, however, 
it is suggested that the enemy known as desire can be defeated 
by knowledge of the true self, which stands above and beyond 
even the intellect or personality. When our spiritual identity is 
realised, then the desire to enjoy the world through the material 
identity naturally declines.
The connection between chapter 3 and karma-yoga
From the beginning of the discussion on this subject, the Bhaga-
vad-gita has indicated that karma-yoga means the performance 

--- PAGE 74 ---
Bhagavad-gita
66
of dharmic duty without any selfish desire. Hence, it is clear 
that the presence of kama, desire, within the heart and mind of 
the practitioner will be a major obstacle to the practice. In this 
passage, the point is pursued in more detail by showing how the 
presence of desire firstly causes a person to deviate from dharma 
and virtue, and secondly inhibits the knowledge and detachment 
the karma-yogin is striving to achieve.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 3
The Gita’s third chapter begins with a question from Arjuna 
that seeks clarification of the ideas Krishna set out in Chapter 
2. Krishna explains again that action performed without desire 
is superior to the physical renunciation of the world, for no one 
in any condition of life can completely refrain from action. The 
Gita then explains why the Vedic yajña is to be performed; it is 
not for personal gain but for the welfare of the world, for yajña 
ensures that the rains will fall and provide food for all. One 
who has achieved spiritual realisation has nothing to gain from 
action but still he will continue to act, not for selfish reasons 
but because he seeks the wellbeing of everyone. Even Krishna 
himself acts for this reason, embodying the spirit of karma-yoga. 
Hence, even an enlightened sadhu will continue to perform his 
dharmic duty and will not adopt the duties of any other varna. 
The chapter concludes with a further question from Arjuna, this 
time about the impulse that leads people to act sinfully. Krishna 
responds by emphasising his insistence that selfish desire should 
be abandoned. It is desire alone that leads to sinful action; hence 
a person should strive to overcome this powerful foe in his quest 
for spiritual perfection.
The third chapter of the Bhagavad-gita builds on the notion 
of a karma-yoga that Krishna initially established in verses 47 
to 54 of the Chapter 2, but here the practice is explained in 
more detail. It now becomes clear that a part of the reason for 
the advocacy of karma-yoga is a concern that the welfare of the 
world should not suffer because its leaders decide to abandon 
their duties in order to pursue higher spiritual goals. When 

--- PAGE 75 ---
Chapter 3 
67
karma-yoga is properly understood this is not necessary, and the 
stability of the world is a vitally important factor that cannot 
be ignored. Moreover, we see here clear indications of the ideas 
that will become increasingly significant as the Gita continues 
its discourse, notably jnana and bhakti, knowledge and devotion. 
Chapters 4 and 5 continue to explain in more detail various 
aspects of the practice of karma-yoga, but in the sixth chapter, 
the emphasis on knowledge of the true self comes wholly to the 
fore. Furthermore, in the chapters that follow, it is the nature of 
God and devotion to God that emerge as the central themes of 
the Bhagavad-gita’s instruction. 

--- PAGE 76 ---

--- PAGE 77 ---

69
Chapter 4
I
n the fourth chapter of the Bhagavad-gita, we find further 
instruction on the practice of the karma-yoga that has already 
been considered in detail. Towards the end of the chapter, the 
emphasis of the teachings changes as Krishna begins to shift his 
focus away from the performance of desireless action towards the 
higher knowledge that should support this practice. We see this 
change of emphasis occurring in verse 33 in which jñana (realised 
knowledge) is emphasised as the highest yajña (religious practice). 
The remaining verses reveal the importance of realised knowl-
edge in reaching the ultimate goal. Before taking us through this 
transition from karma-yoga to spiritual knowledge, however, the 
chapter begins with significant revelations about Krishna’s divine 
identity and his descent to earth. The nature of God is a subject 
explored in detail in later chapters, but here we have a taste of 
what is to come in response to a question from Arjuna.
Verses 1–11: The doctrine of avatar
1.	
The Lord said: I instructed this ever-existing yoga to 
Vivasvan. Vivasvan instructed it to Manu and Manu 
taught it to Ikshvaku.
2.	
It was in this way that the Raja-Rishis (royal saints) 
understood this yoga, receiving it one from the other 
in succession, but after a long time had passed knowl-
edge of this yoga was lost in this world, Paramtapa. 
3.	
This same ancient yoga has today been instructed by 
me to you because you are my devotee (bhakta) and 
my friend. It is indeed the most profound mystery.

--- PAGE 78 ---
Bhagavad-gita
70
4.	
Arjuna said: Your birth was later than the birth of 
Vivasvan, which was earlier. So how can I understand 
that you taught this to him in the beginning?
5.	
The Lord said: There are many births of mine that 
have passed and of yours also, Arjuna. I know about 
them all but you do not know of them, Paramtapa.
6.	
Although I am unborn and my identity is unchanging, 
and although I am the controller (ishvara) of all beings, 
still I resort to my own prakriti energy and appear by 
means of my own power.
7.	
Whenever there is a decline in dharma, O Bharata, and 
whenever there is an increase in adharma, it is then 
that I manifest myself.
8.	
For the protection of the righteous (sadhus), for the 
destruction of the wrongdoers and for the purpose of 
establishing dharma, I appear age after age.
9.	
He who fully understands the truth about my divine 
birth and activity does not take birth again after 
giving up his body. He comes to Me, Arjuna.
10.	
Free of desire, fear, and anger, wholly dedicated to 
me and dependent upon me, many persons purified 
by knowledge and austerity have attained my state 
of existence.
11.	
According to the manner in which they dedicate them-
selves to me so I devote myself to them. In all circum-
stances people follow the path I set for them, Partha.
This is one of the best known of all the passages in the Bhaga-
vad-gita, as it sets out one of the most important elements of 
Hindu teachings about God, particularly for those Hindus 
whose religion tends towards Vaishnavism. The idea of avatar is 
a significant feature of Vaishnava theology, and it is here in the 
Bhagavad-gita that we get the original pronouncement of this 
teaching. There are a number of points we might note from the 
passage, some of which will be taken up in more detail later on.
It is the first three verses of the chapter that prompt Arjuna’s 
question. Here Krishna is demonstrating that the karma-yoga he 

--- PAGE 79 ---
Chapter 4
71
has revealed is not a new idea he has just come up with but has 
been practised since ancient times. It is interesting to note that 
the line of descent he refers to in the transmission of this form 
of religious practice is through kshatriyas rather than brahmins. 
This suggests that karma-yoga is primarily for people who have 
worldly responsibilities; it is a means of pursuing the highest 
spiritual goals whilst still discharging one’s social duties.
It is apparent from the question in verse 4 that at this point 
Arjuna is still not certain about Krishna’s divinity or his identity 
as an avatar of Narayana (Vishnu). Vivasvan is the sun god, one 
of the twelve Vedic Adityas, but of course the Supreme Deity 
is the creator of all the gods. So Arjuna’s question here suggests 
that he has not yet accepted Krishna’s divine identity. 
The use of the word prakriti in verse 6 suggests that when 
Vishnu assumes an avatar form, it is in a body composed of matter 
(prakriti). Most Vaishnava commentators do not accept this and 
interpret prakriti here as meaning ‘my own (divine) nature’. On 
balance, the use of prakriti might seem to suggest that the Deity 
takes on a material body in order to play the role of a human 
being (as in Christian beliefs about Jesus), but it is not conclusive.
Verses 7 and 8 are perhaps the best known of any passage from 
the Bhagavad-gita, and it is here that the classical doctrine of 
avatar is established with the reasons for a descent being given 
as the decline in dharma, the increase of adharma, the need to 
protect righteous persons, and the need to vanquish the wicked 
who have destroyed the equilibrium of the world. The Vaishnava 
Puranas provide many avatar stories which reflect the definition 
provided here in the Gita.
Verse 9 is very important in understanding Hindu devotional 
practice, as it refers to learning about the stories contained in the 
Puranas, which tell of Krishna’s birth and activities (janma and 
karma). Today all over India there are story-tellers, bhajan singers, 
dances, dramas, and recitations based on the lives of Krishna, 
Rama, and occasionally other avatars as well. In the modern 
era, this form of religious practice has been translated into new 
media such as comic books, film, television, and internet. This 

--- PAGE 80 ---
Bhagavad-gita
72
long and thriving tradition can be derived from the idea given 
here that learning about the birth and activities of the Deity is 
one path to moksha.
Verse 11 is also one that is well known to many Hindus, and it 
does seem to confirm the idea of Swami Vivekananda and others 
that all forms of religion are a part of the path established by the 
Supreme Deity. Here then, we find support for the traditional 
Hindu attitude of religious tolerance, for Krishna does not say 
‘this is my religion and those who do not follow it are all evil 
and will be punished’. Rather, he says mama vartmanuvartante 
manushyah partha sarvashah, which suggests that every religious 
path is a part of Krishna’s way – mama vartma – and different types 
of religion are established depending on the extent to which a 
person is able to surrender to Krishna. 
Having deviated somewhat from its main topic, the Bhaga-
vad-gita now returns to its discourse on karma-yoga, the 
performance of ritual action as duty rather than for worldly gain. 
In this passage, however, we see Krishna once more bringing 
himself into the equation as he did in Chapter 3 on a similar 
topic (vv. 22–3). And here, ritual action does not just mean the 
performance of the Vedic yajña or murti-puja (image worship) in 
a temple, but is the duty one is bound to perform based on one’s 
varna or social position.
Verses 12–17: Krishna and Karma-yoga
12.	
Seeking success through ritual action, some people 
worship the gods. In the human sphere, success is 
quickly attained through ritual acts.
13.	
I created the system of four varnas based on the gunas 
and types of action. And you should understand that 
although I am the creator of this system, I am still the 
one who does not act, the one who does not decay.
14.	 Actions cannot leave a mark on me and I am unaf-
fected by the fruits of action. He who understands 
this truth about me is not bound by the actions 
he performs.

--- PAGE 81 ---
Chapter 4
73
15.	
In the past this truth was well known to people 
who sought liberation from rebirth and also per-
formed action. So you should also perform your 
designated actions, just as people in the past fulfilled 
their duties.
16.	 What is action? What is non-action? Even the wise 
are confused about this. I will now explain to you 
what action is; when you understand this you will be 
freed from evil.
17.	
One must understand about action and one must 
understand about forbidden action. One must also 
understand what non-action is; the course of action is 
indeed hard to comprehend.
What does verse 13 tell us about varna and caste?
There is an argument to suggest that this verse is saying that varna 
(and hence caste by implication) is not based on birth but on a 
person’s qualities (gunas) and the way in which he acts. So it could 
be used by reformers who want to see the rigidity of the caste 
system eroded. The point, however, is not conclusive. It could 
well be that Krishna is merely saying that the varnas are defined 
by the gunas that predominate in each of them and by the type 
of work that is designated for the members of each social class. 
In their commentaries, Shankaracharya, Ramanujacharya, and 
Madhvacharya all take the verse in this latter sense.
Why does Krishna bring himself into  
the discussion of ritual action?
In the second half of verse 13 and in verse 14, Krishna refers to 
himself as being a person who engages in action and yet is not 
affected by the law of karma. As he has just revealed himself to 
be the ishvara (v. 6) or Supreme Deity, this statement could be a 
further reflection on his own divinity, but this is not emphasised 
here. The real point would seem to be that the performance of 
action does not necessarily lead to the bondage of rebirth under 
the control of the law of karma. This idea is raised again in the 

--- PAGE 82 ---
Bhagavad-gita
74
following verses, especially v. 16, where the question is asked 
as to what action really is. Here we are again in touch with the 
doctrine of karma-yoga. Action will only produce future rebirth 
if it is performed with a selfish motivation. Action performed 
without desire does not produce any future result, and this means 
that the actor can attain freedom from karma in a state of moksha. 
Whether or not he is regarded as the Deity, Krishna himself is an 
example of a person who acts but is not affected by the results of 
action, for it is not the physical action that produces karma but the 
state of mind that motivates the action. This is one of the most 
important teachings of the Bhagavad-gita and is closely related 
to the teachings of the Yoga system, such as those encountered 
in Patañjali’s Yoga-sutra.
Following on from verse 14, verse 15 is again all about kar-
ma-yoga. Firstly, Krishna is emphasising that it is not just a recent 
innovation but that it is part of the traditional religion of the 
followers of the Vedas, and secondly, he is asserting again that 
one who performs his worldly duties can simultaneously pursue 
the spiritual goal of moksha. Hence renunciation of the world by 
living as a monk or sadhu is not a necessary requirement for one 
who seeks liberation from rebirth.
Non-action
We can now see why Krishna poses the questions he does in 
verses 16 and 17. What is karma and what is akarma? Even 
the wise men, the kavis, find this a confusing subject. Why? 
It seems very simple to define what action is. But Krishna’s 
point is that desireless action really falls under the heading of 
non-action because it produces no future result. And then again, 
refraining from action, akarma, can be defined as karma if one 
refrains from action due to selfish or malicious motivation. For 
example, if I see someone in distress but selfishly decide not to 
help, I have performed no action but still karma will accrue 
because in all cases it is the state of consciousness underlying 
the action (or inaction) rather than the physical deed itself that 
is significant.

--- PAGE 83 ---
Chapter 4
75
Verses 18–23: The Question Answered – Karma-yoga
18.	
One who perceives inaction in action and action in 
inaction is intelligent amongst men. He is properly 
engaged and he performs all his designated actions.
19.	 When all a person’s endeavours are devoid of any 
inclination towards desire, his action is burned by the 
fire of knowledge. The wise ones describe such a 
person as a learned pandit.
20.	 When a person gives up attachment for the fruits of 
action, is always satisfied and is not dependent on any 
other, then even though he is engaged in action he 
performs no action at all.
21.	
Having no expectation of result, controlling his 
thoughts, practising self-control, giving up all desire 
for acquisitions and acting only for the maintenance 
of the body, a person remains free of contamination.
22.	 If he is satisfied with whatever befalls him, transcends 
duality, is free of envy and is equal in success and fail-
ure, then even though he engages in action he is not 
bound by it.
23.	
For a liberated person whose attachments have van-
ished, whose mind is absorbed in higher knowledge 
and who acts only in the form of yajña, any action he 
performs dissolves away completely.
We could take these verses as being almost the last word on 
karma-yoga, in which the main points are again re-emphasised. 
They also provide the answer to the previous question about 
action and non-action, defining these in terms of the motivation.
Inaction in action and action in inaction
This goes back to our previous discussion. Essentially, one sees 
‘inaction in action’ (akarma in karma) when the action in question 
is performed without selfish desire. It then effectively becomes 
inaction (or non-action) because it will not produce a future 
reaction according to the law of karma. And action is to be 
understood as non-action when a person gives up performing 

--- PAGE 84 ---
Bhagavad-gita
76
his duty for selfish reasons. That failure to perform action will 
produce a future reaction, and so in that sense the non-action is 
action, the akarma is karma.
How is it that a person ‘performs no action at all even 
though he is engaged in action’?
Verse 20 again reinforces our understanding of karma-yoga. The 
key phrase here is at the start of the verse: tyaktva karma-pha-
la-sangam, meaning ‘giving up (tyaktva) attachment (sanga) to the 
fruits of action (karma-phala)’. When action is performed with 
this renounced state of consciousness, there is no future karma 
generated. Hence, in truth, ‘he performs no action at all.’
Acts only in the form of yajna
The word yajña means the Vedic ritual in which offerings are 
made to the gods through the sacred fire. Of course this ritual 
is often performed in pursuit of some worldly goal, but here I 
think yajña refers to action that is performed as a ritualised duty 
as opposed to action performed for personal gain. If yajña is taken 
in this sense, then the connection with the ongoing discourse 
on karma-yoga becomes clearly apparent.
This point about yajña is expanded upon in the following verses 
in which the concept of yajña is broadened so as to include several 
different types of religious activity, including the yoga practices 
discussed later in the Gita. The idea seems to be that all these 
forms of yajña can be included under the heading of karma-yoga 
when they are enacted without selfish desire.
Verses 24–32: Various forms of yajña
24.	 The sacrificial offering is Brahman. The oblation is 
Brahman; it is offered by Brahman into the fire that is 
also Brahman. Brahman alone is reached by a person 
who absorbs his mind completely in the ritual act that 
is Brahman.
25.	
Some practitioners make yajña offerings dedicated to 
the gods alone but others make their offerings into 

--- PAGE 85 ---
Chapter 4
77
the fire of Brahman, performing yajña for its own sake.
26.	 Then there are some who offer hearing and the other 
senses into the fires of restraint and others who offer 
sound and the other objects of the senses into the 
fires of the senses themselves.
27.	
Others offer all the actions performed by the senses 
and the movements of the breath into the fire of yoga 
practice based on self-control, which is illuminated by 
means of true knowledge.
28.	 Some sages, strictly adhering to their vows, perform 
yajña with their possessions, some through religious 
austerity, some through yoga, and some through rec-
itation and knowledge of sacred texts.
29.	 Others offer the prana breath into the apana and the 
apana into the prana, dedicating themselves to the 
practice of pranayama by restricting the movement of 
the prana and the apana.
30.	 Others restrict their eating and make offerings of the 
prana breaths into the prana breaths themselves. All 
such persons who have knowledge of yajña have their 
contaminations destroyed by means of yajña.
31.	
Consuming the nectar or immortality in the form of 
the leftover offerings at the end of a yajña, they pro-
ceed to the eternal region of Brahman. There is noth-
ing in this world for a person who performs no yajña, 
O best of the Kurus, and this is even more the case for 
the other world.
32.	 Thus many different types of yajña are expanded 
within the mouth of Brahman. You must understand 
that all of them are based on action, for when you 
understand this you will be liberated.
This passage is a little difficult and requires some careful con-
sideration, although I think it can be identified as a further 
definition of karma-yoga, leading eventually to the emphasis on 
higher knowledge with which this chapter ends. Let us take it 
point by point.

--- PAGE 86 ---
Bhagavad-gita
78
Verse 24 defines the various elements of the traditional Vedic 
yajña as Brahman. It is difficult to say precisely what this means. 
Shankaracharya explains that this is the vision of the enlight-
ened person when he performs the ritual fire offering. He is not 
looking for material gain through the ritual, but in his detached 
state of consciousness identifies the ritual and all its component 
parts as Brahman. Ramanuja suggests that all these parts of the 
yajña are designated as Brahman because they are derived from 
Brahman, which is the original source of the world. Here, one 
suspects that Shankara might be closer to the spirit of the text, 
for the Gita is here again arguing that when it is performed 
without desire, religious ritual of any sort is a spiritual practice 
and hence is Brahman. 
Verse 25 seems to be the key to this passage, as it indicates 
that the yajña can become a spiritual practice performed by yogins 
rather than the materially motivated ritual that Krishna refers 
to so dismissively in 2.42–5. This is another important feature 
of the teachings revealed by the Bhagavad-gita. In the Veda, 
there is a clear division between the karma-kanda consisting of 
worldly ritual and the jñana-kanda, the knowledge revealed by 
the Upanishads, which leads to liberation from rebirth. Here, 
however, Krishna achieves a reconciliation of the karma-kanda 
and the jñana-kanda by re-branding the Vedic rituals as a form of 
karma-yoga when they are performed without selfish desire. And 
of course, as we have learned, karma-yoga is a path to moksha, the 
goal of the jñana-kanda.
The remaining verses of the passage then show that the word 
yajña does not refer solely to the Vedic ritual. Verse 28 describes 
yajña as being performed with objects (dravya, presumably those 
offered into the sacred fire) through religious austerities and 
vows, through yoga techniques or through understanding and 
reciting sacred texts. And in verses 28 and 29, reference is made 
to the yogic practice of pranayama, the regulation of the breath 
within the body, which is also designated as a type of yajña. In 
verse 31, we are back with the Vedic yajña and the eating of the 
food leftover after the offerings have been made into the fire.

--- PAGE 87 ---
Chapter 4
79
Verse 31 seems to provide the conclusion and explanation of 
the passage, which is essentially that all these types of yajña are 
based on action, and hence action as karma-yoga can indeed lead 
the practitioner to the realm of Brahman, which is beyond this 
world of rebirth.
Verses 33–42: realised knowledge 
as the goal of karma-yoga
33.	
The Jñana Yajña consisting of knowledge is superior 
to the Dravya Yajña consisting of physical objects, O 
destroyer of the foe. Without any exception, Partha, 
all action finds its proper conclusion in knowledge.
34.	 You should gain this knowledge through submission, 
inquiry, and service. Those who have knowledge and 
perceive the truth will impart knowledge to you.
35.	
And when you have acquired this knowledge, you 
never again fall prey to illusion, Pandava, for you will 
see that all living beings are within your own self and, 
moreover, within me.
36.	
Even if you perform sinful acts more heinous than 
those of all other sinners, still you can cross beyond all 
such wickedness by means of the boat of knowledge.
37.	
Just as a blazing fire turns fuel to ashes, Arjuna, so the 
fire of knowledge turns all actions to ashes.
38.	
In this world there is nothing as purifying as knowl-
edge. In due time, a person who is successful in yoga 
will find this knowledge within himself through him-
self alone.
39.	 One who has faith will acquire this knowledge if he 
devotes himself to the quest and gains mastery over 
the senses. And when he has acquired this knowledge 
he very soon attains supreme peace.
40.	
But if a person is devoid of knowledge, has no faith 
or is beset by doubts he will meet with destruction. 
Neither this world nor the world to come is for the 
doubting soul, and he can never be happy. 

--- PAGE 88 ---
Bhagavad-gita
80
41.	 When his action is given over to the practice of yoga, 
when his doubts are destroyed by knowledge, and 
when he is in full control of his existence, a person’s 
actions cannot bind him, Dhanamjaya.
42.	 Therefore, using the sword of knowledge, cut through 
this doubt of yours, which has arisen due to igno-
rance and is now situated in your heart. Take up this 
yoga and arise, Bharata.
In verse 33 of Chapter 4, the Bhagavad-gita displays a clear pro-
gression in the teachings Krishna is giving to Arjuna, for here 
we are told that the karma-yoga previously advocated is effective 
because it leads to higher knowledge, or the jñana emphasised by 
the Upanishads as the real key to liberation from rebirth. This 
transitional verse introduces us to a new topic that runs through 
Chapter 5 and into Chapter 6 where the quest for spiritual real-
isation is combined with teachings on yoga practice, although 
there is a break in this progression in Chapter 5 where Arjuna 
asks for a clarification of the point. 
The relationship between karma-yoga and jñana
In verse 33, we read that all action (karma) finds it conclusion in 
knowledge (jñana). Of course, this could refer just to ritual action, 
and then the meaning would be that all action is renounced when 
a person attains higher knowledge. However, it may well be that 
the meaning is that action in the form of karma-yoga culminates in 
the higher knowledge that brings moksha. This would seem to be 
logical in light of the previous passage, and it is the view taken by 
Shankaracharya in his commentary. In verse 38, we find it stated 
that knowledge is yoga-samsiddha, the perfection of yoga practice, 
and up to this point, yoga for the Gita has meant karma-yoga. This, 
again, would seem to support the conclusion that karma-yoga finds 
its natural conclusion in the realisation of higher knowledge.
How can one acquire this knowledge?
Verse 34 indicates that enlightened persons will reveal this knowl-
edge to those who render service to them and make inquiries in 

--- PAGE 89 ---
Chapter 4
81
a mood of submission. This implies the guru-disciple relationship 
as the means by which knowledge is transmitted, though there 
is no suggestion here of the need for a formal relationship of 
this type. Verse 39 further indicates that faith is a prerequisite 
for one who is seeking knowledge, as is dedication to the quest 
and the power to control the senses. And as we noted above, the 
suggestion is that true knowledge arises naturally in the heart 
of one who has been successful in his execution of karma-yoga.
What is the nature of this knowledge; what does it reveal?
Perhaps surprisingly, the actual nature of the knowledge being 
referred to here is touched upon only briefly. This is in verse 35 
where the knowledge in question is defined as being the real-
isation that all beings exist within the atman and hence within 
Krishna who at this point seems to be identified as the inner 
self of all beings. This view that the atman is identical with the 
Deity is a common theme in Vaishnava and Shaivite thought 
and reflects the Upanishadic teaching that the atman is identical 
with Brahman. Hence, the knowledge that is being discussed 
here as arising due to the practice of karma-yoga would seem to 
be close to the advaitic notion of absolute oneness; all beings are 
identical to oneself and identical to the supreme absolute reality, 
present here as Krishna. 
The result of acquiring spiritual knowledge
In contrast to the paucity of definition, much of the passage is 
devoted to discussing the results that are to be gained through the 
acquisition of jñana. A number of points are mentioned. Firstly, 
in verse 35, it is said that knowledge puts an end to illusion; this 
is important for Shankaracharya for he regards avidya, ignorance, 
as the single barrier to moksha. Then, in verses 36 and 37, we 
are informed that the effects of previous sinful acts are dispersed 
through the acquisition of knowledge. In other words, the jñanin 
will not have to suffer the results of any of the actions he has 
previously performed, for this knowledge takes one beyond the 
realm of suffering and rebirth. And thirdly, we are told in verse 

--- PAGE 90 ---
Bhagavad-gita
82
39 that one who acquires this knowledge will thereby gain the 
highest state of peace – param shantim – a phrase that is usually 
equated with liberation from the troubles of this world.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 4
I would suggest that we can divide Chapter 4 into three broad 
sections. In the opening verses, Arjuna’s doubt about Krishna 
as a teacher of ancient wisdom is addressed by a revelation of 
the doctrine of avatar. Here Krishna is drawn, perhaps prema-
turely, into a discussion of his own nature and his position as 
the Supreme Deity who controls the world. But at this point he 
chooses not to dwell on the subject and moves back to the idea 
of desireless action, the karma-yoga that has been the main topic 
up to this point and is here explained in still more detail. From 
verse 33 onwards, the emphasis is shifted somewhat away from 
karma-yoga towards the acquisition of realised knowledge. In this 
final section of the chapter, jñana is revealed as the factor that 
overcomes previous karma, dispels illusion and allows the soul to 
experience absolute tranquillity in the liberated state.
However, before we can proceed towards a fuller exposition of 
this topic of spiritual knowledge, the natural flow of the discourse 
is interrupted somewhat as Arjuna seeks clarification as to why 
Krishna has moved from emphasising karma-yoga towards estab-
lishing knowledge as the key to spiritual success. The fifth chapter 
of the Gita opens with this question, which allows Krishna to 
explain more fully the relationship between the yoga of action 
and the development of realised knowledge of the atman.

--- PAGE 91 ---

83
Chapter 5
A
s mentioned above, Chapter 5 opens with a question from 
Arjuna in which he apparently seeks clarification of what 
has been said before. However, it is rather difficult to see 
exactly how Arjuna’s question relates to what Krishna has been 
saying and at first glance seems to be a bit of a non sequitur. Has 
Krishna actually recommended renunciation of action? 
Verses 1–7: Samkhya and yoga are one
1.	
Arjuna said: Krishna, you advocate both the renuncia-
tion of action and the yoga of action as well. But which 
of these is the better course? Tell me this definitively.
2.	
The Lord said: Renunciation and karma-yoga both 
lead to the highest result. But between the two, kar-
ma-yoga is superior to the renunciation of action.
3.	
One who neither loathes nor hankers after anything is to 
be known as a constant renunciant. Transcending such 
duality, O mighty one, he easily breaks free of bondage.
4.	
Foolish people say that Samkhya and yoga are differ-
ent, but not learned pandits. A person who properly 
adheres to one of these paths gains the fruit of both.
5.	
The position achieved by the followers of Samkhya is 
also attained by those who adhere to the path of yoga. 
One who sees that Samkhya and yoga are one and the 
same, truly sees.
6.	
But without engaging in yoga practice renunciation 
is very difficult to achieve. The sage who engages in 
yoga practice quickly attains Brahman.

--- PAGE 92 ---
Bhagavad-gita
84
7.	
One who engages in yoga and has purified his very 
being, who has gained self-mastery and control of the 
senses, whose own self has become the self of all beings, 
is not besmirched even though he engages in action.
So why does Arjuna ask this question? Has Krishna actually 
praised samnyasam karmanam, the renunciation of action? If we 
look back to the beginning of the third chapter, it seems that 
he has done just the opposite. Firstly, I think we must accept 
that Arjuna has still not fully grasped the solution to the riddle 
posed by Krishna in 4.18 concerning action in non-action and 
non-action in action. He still seems to think that the renuncia-
tion of action means just that, whereas Krishna has been trying 
to explain that by giving up desire for the fruits of action true 
renunciation can be practised even whilst one continues to act. 
Hence, Arjuna sees Krishna’s praise of knowledge at the end 
of Chapter 4 as an alternative to the path of karma-yoga. After 
all, in verse 37, Krishna did say that the fire of knowledge will 
turn action into ashes. So it is in order to fully understand the 
relationship between action and knowledge that Arjuna asks this 
question, but he is probably mistaken in equating the knowledge 
Krishna has referred to with the renunciation of action; and 
Krishna’s response to the question suggests very clearly that it is 
based on a misapprehension.
Let us now move on to look at Krishna’s response from which 
we can note the following points.
In verse 2, Krishna initially acknowledges the premise of 
Arjuna’s question, accepting that renunciation and karma-yoga 
are two spiritual paths that reach the same goal. Karma-yoga is 
judged to be the better of the two, however, confirming the 
conclusion given in the first verses of Chapter 3, which formed a 
response to a rather similar inquiry from Arjuna. In verse 3, we 
find that renunciation is defined in terms of a state of detached 
consciousness rather than giving up physical action, which is of 
course a characteristic of karma-yoga.
In verses 4 and 5, it seems that Krishna is rejecting the idea 
that underpinned Arjuna’s question, namely that renunciation 

--- PAGE 93 ---
Chapter 5
85
and karma-yoga are two separate paths, although the words used 
are different. Here, it is asserted that Samkhya and yoga are in 
effect the same path because if a person follows one of them he 
derives the result of both. The logical presumption must be that 
here Samkhya is equated with the idea of renunciation and yoga 
is the karma-yoga initially offered as an alternative. The point 
is further complicated by the fact that Samkhya and yoga are 
two of the traditional systems of Indian philosophy. These are 
discussed at some length in other passages of the Mahabharata, 
and there also we find the declaration that the two are virtually 
the same system. Hence I think we can take these two verses in 
two ways simultaneously. Firstly, we have confirmation of the 
conclusion reached elsewhere in the Mahabharata that Samkhya 
and yoga are essentially one system of thought. Secondly, this 
conclusion is applied to Arjuna’s question about renunciation and 
karma-yoga, in effect saying that the two are really a part of the 
same spiritual process and that the distinction Arjuna is seeking 
to draw is an artificial one.
This point is confirmed in verses 6 and 7, where it is said that 
renunciation without yoga practice is very difficult – duhkham 
aptum a-yogatah. And in verse 7, we see that the practice of yoga 
involves the renunciation of the fruits of action, a point that is 
confirmed in verse 2 of Chapter 6. Hence, both are to be taken 
as a part of the same path of spiritual progress.
In a very real sense, Arjuna’s question has helped to move the 
discussion on in an appropriate manner. In Chapter 4, we had a 
restatement of the main ideas of karma-yoga and a new emphasis 
on spiritual knowledge. So how do these two ideas fit together? 
This is the discussion that is taken up in Chapter 5, and, as we 
shall see, higher realisation of the true self is integrated with the 
yoga of action.
Verses 8–15: Karma-yoga and realised knowledge
8.	
One who is engaged in yoga practice and sees the 
truth thinks, ‘I never perform any action.’ He thinks 
in this way even whilst seeing, hearing, touching, 

--- PAGE 94 ---
Bhagavad-gita
86
smelling, eating, moving, sleeping, breathing,
9.	
Speaking, evacuating, seizing, opening his eyes, or 
closing them. He considers, ‘It is just the senses 
engaging with their objects.’
10.	
One who deposits his actions on Brahman and aban-
dons attachment is not smeared by sin when he acts, 
as a lotus leaf is not touched by water.
11.	
Abandoning attachment, yogins then act with body, 
mind, speech, and with the senses in order to purify 
themselves. 
12.	 Abandoning the fruits of action, the practitioner of 
yoga attains enduring peace. But one who does not 
engage in yoga and is motivated by desire remains in 
bondage, attached to the fruits of action.
13.	
Giving up all actions mentally, the embodied being 
easily remains in full control within the city of 
nine gates, neither acting nor causing action to 
be performed.
14.	 The Lord generates neither the means by which 
action is performed nor the actions themselves as 
performed by the people of the world. Nor does he 
create the conjunction between action and its result; it 
is a person’s inherent nature that does this.
15.	
The mighty Lord does not assume anyone’s sin or 
indeed their virtue. But knowledge is covered over by 
ignorance and so living beings become deluded.
Why does the yogin think, ‘I never perform any action’?
The obvious answer is given in verse 9: ‘It is just the senses 
engaging with their objects.’ There is, however, a little more 
to it than this. Implicit in this statement is the realisation that 
my real identity lies beyond the senses as the atman, the soul 
within the body. So I never perform any action because action 
is performed by the bodily senses, and my own true identity 
is the atman, which is not the body. Here then, we begin to 
see how the philosophy of action is linked to the philosophy 

--- PAGE 95 ---
Chapter 5
87
of the soul and body: yoga and Samkhya are indeed one and 
the same.
Who is the lord and the mighty lord (prabhu and vibhu) 
referred to in verses 14 and 15?
Some Vaishnava commentators suggest that these verses may 
refer to the idea of an antaryamin, an expansion of the Supreme 
Deity who exists within each body alongside the atman, guiding 
it through the path of rebirth. This idea gains some confirmation 
later in the Gita in verses such as 16.18 and 18.61, but here I think 
the words prabhu and vibhu both refer to the atman, the individual 
soul that is the master and controller of the body and senses.
How does karma-yoga combine with higher knowledge?
Here again we have a connection between knowledge of the 
inner self and karma-yoga. The yoga demands that we perform our 
actions without attachment to the result, and this becomes pos-
sible when we realise that our true identity lies beyond the body. 
We are spirit and not matter and because action is performed 
by the material body and senses, we can become detached from 
the results of action by the realisation that we are not the doer 
and that the result has no effect on our higher spiritual nature.
After explaining how karma-yoga is intimately related to 
spiritual knowledge, how yoga and Samkhya are one, Krishna 
now returns to the topic he was pursuing prior to Arjuna’s 
interjection, providing us with deeper insight into the path of 
knowledge, the jñana-marga.
Verses 16–26: Knowledge, detachment, 
and spiritual realisation
16.	
But for some people the ignorance shrouding the 
inner self (atman) is destroyed by knowledge. For such 
persons, knowledge acts like the sun and illuminates 
the higher reality.
17.	
Their intelligence, their life and their conviction are 
devoted to that goal, for they are fully dedicated to 

--- PAGE 96 ---
Bhagavad-gita
88
it. Purged of contamination by means of knowledge, 
they go to the place from which there is no return.
18.	 The learned pandit perceives the same reality within a 
brahmin endowed with wisdom and good conduct, a 
cow, an elephant, a dog, and one who eats dogs.
19.	
Even whilst they are still in this world, persons whose 
minds are fixed in this state of equanimity conquer 
the process of creation. It is Brahman that is free of 
blemish and always the same and so they are situated 
in Brahman.
20.	 Such a person does not rejoice when he gains what is 
dear to him nor is he disturbed when he experiences 
something undesirable. His intellect is steady, he is 
free of delusion, he has knowledge of Brahman and 
he is situated in Brahman.
21.	
Remaining wholly unattached to external sensations, 
such a person finds joy in the self within. Absorbing 
himself in Brahman through yoga practice, he experi-
ences joy that does not decay.
22.	 The pleasures that arise from sensory contacts are in 
fact sources of misery. They have a beginning and an 
end, Kaunteya, and so an enlightened person (budha) 
does not delight in them.
23.	 Any person in this world who is able to resist the force 
of desire and anger before being released from the body 
is indeed properly engaged in yoga and is a joyful man.
24.	 One whose happiness is within, whose pleasure is 
within and whose light is within is indeed a yogin. Exist-
ing as Brahman, he attains the state of brahma nirvana.
25.	
It is rishis who are free of contamination who gain 
that state of brahma nirvana. For them duality is dis-
pelled, they are self-controlled and they take delight in 
the welfare of all beings.
26.	 This brahma nirvana quickly arises for sages detached 
from desire and anger, whose minds are controlled, 
and who have knowledge of the inner self.

--- PAGE 97 ---
Chapter 5
89
I think the real significance of this passage is that it shows very 
clearly how the karma-yoga Krishna has earlier advocated leads 
to the realised knowledge that for the Upanishads is the key to 
moksha. We should note the following points here.
This passage is very close to the doctrine of the Upanishads 
in its revelation that jñana is the destroyer of the ignorance that 
is the cause of the bondage keeping the soul tied to this world. 
It is this higher knowledge that dispels the darkness of material 
existence and thereby leads the soul to a state beyond rebirth. 
Above all else, the Bhagavad-gita is a moksha-shastra, a treatise 
on liberation, and we may note here how many times and in 
how many ways this ultimate goal is referred to. In verse 17, it 
is described as attaining the state from which there is no return, 
in other words from which one is never again reborn. Verses 
19 and 20 refer to being ‘situated in Brahman’, which is the 
liberated state of existence. Verse 21 reveals that the liberated 
person experiences a joy that does not decay, which can be 
contrasted with the temporary happiness we experience in this 
world. And verses 24 to 26 use the phrase brahma nirvana to refer 
to the liberated condition. The emphasis here is very much on 
moksha, which is gained through realised knowledge of one’s 
own spiritual identity.
The phrase brahma nirvana, noted above, has a clear resonance 
with Buddhist teachings on moksha. We cannot say, however, 
whether this is due to Buddhist influence on the Gita or the 
Gita’s influence on Buddhism, or whether this was a common 
form of language used in ancient times to refer to moksha that 
was made use of by Krishna here and by Buddhists referring to 
the same concept.
Verse 18 is an interesting one for a number of reasons. Firstly, 
it gives some insight into the nature of the knowledge pre-
sented here as the means of purging all contamination. The 
learned pandit, presumably one who possesses the knowledge, 
sees different types of living beings as equal despite their physical 
distinctiveness – panditah sama-darshinah. Why? Again, it is not 
stated overtly, but the answer would seem to be that it is because 

--- PAGE 98 ---
Bhagavad-gita
90
he perceives the atman rather than the body as the true identity of 
a living being. It is also interesting to note that Swami Viveka-
nanda repeatedly stressed that a Vedantist who has this view of 
the oneness of all beings must manifest this knowledge in his 
attitude towards others; hence any discrimination against women 
or against persons of a different caste was incompatible with the 
realised knowledge of Vedanta, as represented in this verse.
Verses 20–26 emphasise the point that the development of 
this higher knowledge must be accompanied, and is indeed 
effected, by a sense of detachment from the world and its pleas-
ures, which are enjoyed through the senses. It is here that we 
see again the connection between karma-yoga and the realised 
knowledge that is the current topic for consideration. The 
karma-yogin continues to be active in the world, but crucially 
he renounces desire for gain and attachment to the result, pre-
cisely the qualities that are mentioned here in relation to the 
development of realised knowledge.
And finally, we might note that the definition of the yogin 
given in verse 24 is somewhat different from that given for the 
karma-yogin, where the emphasis is always on renouncing selfish 
desire and being detached from the results of action. Here the 
yogin is defined as one who experiences the joy of self-realisation 
and has knowledge of his own inner identity. This really leads 
on to the final verses of the chapter and indeed the discourse 
on dhyana-yoga, the yoga of meditation, which dominates the 
sixth chapter.
The Bhagavad-gita has now moved definitively on from its 
advocacy of karma-yoga, and the emphasis is very clearly on 
gaining liberation from rebirth by realised knowledge of the 
inner self. Karma-yoga is never wholly absent from the Gita’s 
thought, however, and throughout its course, we get hints and 
reminders of this first great discourse. However, the teachings 
have now moved on, and in the last verses of Chapter 5, we are 
introduced to the next major idea to be covered – realisation or 
knowledge of the inner self that is gained through the techniques 
of yoga meditation.

--- PAGE 99 ---
Chapter 5
91
Verses 27–29: A different kind of yoga
27.	
Setting aside external perceptions, fixing his vision 
between the eyebrows, bringing the prana and apana 
breaths into a state of equilibrium as they move 
within the nostrils,
28.	 And controlling the senses, mind, and intellect, the 
sage who constantly dedicates himself to liberation 
from rebirth and who has given up desire, fear, and 
anger, is indeed a liberated person.
29.	 Understanding me to be the true object of yajña and 
acts of austerity, the supreme lord of the all the worlds 
and the friend of all beings, he attains a state of abso-
lute tranquillity.
Even within these three verses, there are clear differences of 
emphasis. Verses 27 and 28 introduce us to the yoga techniques 
that will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter 6, involving 
concentration of the mind on a single point and the regulation 
of the breath within the body, a technique referred to as pra-
nayama. This discourse follows on logically from what we have 
been taught earlier in the chapter about the necessity of higher 
knowledge, for the techniques mentioned here are designed to 
bring the practitioner to a state of direct perception of the inner 
self or in other words to a state of realised knowledge. But the 
final verse here seems anomalous as it suddenly introduces the 
idea of a personal Deity, a concept that has not figured at all in 
Chapter 5’s discussion of knowledge and karma-yoga, and which 
does not return again until the end of Chapter 6 when the Gita 
does indeed move on to discuss the nature of God. Robert 
Zaehner remarks: 
This very abrupt introduction of the per-
sonal God as the only true recipient and 
experiencer of the sacrifice and religious 
practices in general is surprising, as it 
does not seem to fit in with the rest of the 
chapter which is otherwise quite coherent. 
(Zaehner, 1973, p. 217)

--- PAGE 100 ---
Bhagavad-gita
92
So what are we to make of it? Some scholars might suggest that 
the verse is an interpolation or addition made by a later Vaishnava 
editor, anxious to see that the ideas of bhakti and devotion appear 
in all parts of the Bhagavad-gita. This could be true but as there 
is no evidence to support such a claim, it must be regarded as 
an inadequate solution. For Shankaracharya, there is no real 
problem here. In his Gita commentary, he consistently equates 
Krishna with the atman within all beings, and as this section 
is about knowledge of the atman reference to Krishna as the 
Supreme Deity is perfectly logical. But perhaps we must also look 
at the structure of the teachings of the Gita. It does not move 
in a purely linear manner of reasoning; it gives us prior hints 
before dealing with a topic in full and it frequently includes later 
reminders of previous ideas. So we should probably not be too 
surprised to find Krishna giving us a small suggestion of what is 
to come, even though it does not fit precisely into a sequential 
progression of ideas.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 5
Chapter 5 of the Bhagavad-gita begins with a question from 
Arjuna that sets the agenda for its content as a whole. He asks 
Krishna to make a definitive decision as to whether karma-yoga 
or renunciation of action is the superior path to follow. Krishna 
responds by reasserting the view given earlier in Chapter 3 that 
karma-yoga is better than renunciation, but he refines his answer 
by explaining that the higher knowledge he has discussed at the 
end of Chapter 4 (designated here as Samkhya) is inseparable 
from karma-yoga and hence should not be equated with the 
renunciation of action. He goes on to explain that karma-yoga 
allows the practitioner to acquire realised knowledge of the 
atman because it entails the withdrawal of attachment from the 
external world. Only when one’s preoccupation with external 
perception and enjoyment of the results of action is restrained 
can knowledge of the spiritual reality within one’s own being 
begin to arise. Hence the process of karma-yoga and the attain-
ment of realised knowledge are inseparable and should not be 

--- PAGE 101 ---
Chapter 5
93
regarded as two distinct paths – ekam samkhyam cha yogam cha. 
This is the fundamental message of the fifth chapter, and now 
that this link has been established, we can move on to explore 
how the yoga of meditation allows the adept to gain percep-
tion and hence knowledge of the spiritual domain within one’s 
own being.

--- PAGE 102 ---

--- PAGE 103 ---

95
Chapter 6
T
he sixth chapter of the Bhagavad-gita presents us with a 
wholly new topic, that of dhyana-yoga, the techniques of 
meditation by which one’s perception is withdrawn from 
the external world and turned inwards towards the atman that 
is the true self. The yoga philosophy is one of the six orthodox 
systems of Hindu thought, and the main text for this system is the 
Yoga Sutras composed by the sage Patañjali. In the Bhagavad-gita, 
however, (and in other passages of the Mahabharata) we find the 
earliest complete exposition of the yoga-darshan. Moreover, it 
is interesting to note the clear similarities between the Gita’s 
teachings here and Patañjali’s later treatise. Patañjali offers an 
ashtanga-yoga, a yoga of eight limbs, which is composed of the 
following parts:
•	 yama – restraint from pernicious practices
•	 niyama – the observance of righteous and religious duties
•	 asana – practising sitting postures
•	 pranayama – regulation of the breathing process
•	 pratyahara – withdrawing the senses from their external 
perception
•	 dharana – concentration of the mind on a single point
•	 dhyana – deep meditation on that one single object
•	 samadhi – final realisation and absorption in the object of 
meditation
As we read through the Bhagavad-gita’s discussion of yoga prac-
tice, we may note the way in which it covers these eight limbs 
that are presented by Patañjali in a systematic fashion. But we 
should note as well how Krishna draws his yoga teachings into 

--- PAGE 104 ---
Bhagavad-gita
96
the wider discourse of the Bhagavad-gita, revealing that above 
all else yoga is a practical means of gaining the knowledge of 
the self he has emphasised firstly in Chapter 4 and then again in 
Chapter 5. Before that, however, he seeks to demonstrate the line 
of progression from karma-yoga and to show that the renounced 
state of consciousness inherent in karma-yoga is an essential pre-
requisite for the practice of this yoga of meditation.
Verses 1–9: Renunciation as the basis for yoga
1.	
The Lord said: A person who performs the action he 
is duty-bound to perform whilst remaining detached 
from the fruit of action is a true renunciant (samnya-
sin) and a yogin, not one who never lights the sacrifi-
cial fire and does not perform the ritual.
2.	
You should know that that which they call samnyasa is 
in fact yoga, Pandava. One who has not given up the 
inclination for pleasure can never become a yogin.
3.	
For the sage who is a beginner in yoga, action is said 
to be the means, but for one who is advanced in yoga, 
tranquillity is said to be the means.
4.	
When he has no attachment for the objects of the 
senses or for performing action and when he gives 
up all material inclinations, he is said to be advanced 
in yoga.
5.	
One should elevate oneself by means of the self and 
one should never degrade oneself. One is indeed 
one’s own friend and one’s own enemy as well.
6.	
The self is the friend to one who gains self-control by 
means of the self. But when one has lost his self, then 
this very self acts like an enemy.
7.	
When a person has self-control and possesses inner 
tranquillity the supreme self is realised, whether 
there be heat or cold, happiness or distress, honour 
or dishonour.
8.	
Satisfied by his knowledge and realisation alone, sit-
uated in a higher position and mastering his senses, 

--- PAGE 105 ---
Chapter 6
97
one who engages in this way is said to be a yogin. He 
regards a lump of earth, a stone, and gold equally.
9.	
When considering friends, allies, enemies, those who 
are indifferent, neutrals, those who hate, relatives, 
righteous persons, and the wicked, one who is equal-
minded is in a superior position.
Elaborating upon karma-yoga
Verse 1 seems to be a fairly straightforward reassertion of the doc-
trine of karma-yoga. Its presence here is surely intended to show 
us that the teachings that will now be given are an expansion on 
what has gone before rather than an alternative interpretation 
of yoga.
Verse 2 harks back to Arjuna’s question at the beginning of 
Chapter 5 and makes the same point Krishna previously stressed, 
namely that yoga and renunciation are not two alternative pos-
sibilities but that renunciation is an inherent feature of yoga 
practice. In other words, one cannot practise yoga without first 
withdrawing one’s consciousness from worldly ambitions. And 
of course, this is the main goal of karma-yoga.
It is not entirely clear, but there does seem to be an indication 
in verse 3 of a process of progression from karma-yoga towards 
shama, inner tranquillity, which is the desired state of mind 
for dhyana-yoga. Hence we might conclude that we are being 
presented with a step-by-step path beginning with karma-yoga 
and then, when its goals have been achieved, moving on to the 
next stage, which is the meditation that will now be described. 
Shankaracharya certainly interprets the verse in this way, as he 
is always keen to demonstrate that knowledge is the only path 
to moksha and action is only a preliminary stage of purification.
The ideal consciousness of a yogi
The qualities referred to here include self-control and inner tran-
quillity (jita atma and prashanta atma), indifference to the fluctuating 
fortunes experienced in the world, caring nothing for praise and 
blame, inner satisfaction, control of the senses, and regarding the 

--- PAGE 106 ---
Bhagavad-gita
98
world with equal vision. An important point is being made here, 
particularly in an age in which popular forms of yoga abound. 
The yoga that is taught here is not a form of fitness regime or stress 
relief but is in fact the highest expression of personal spirituality. 
As such it can only be properly undertaken by a person who has 
mentally withdrawn from the world in the manner achieved by 
the successful practice of karma-yoga. The goals that will be offered 
here are the ultimate goals of life, and they are not to be attained 
without intense prior preparation.
Verses 10–17: the practice of yoga
10.	
Staying in a secluded place, the yogin should engage 
himself constantly. He should remain alone, con-
trolling his mind and self, without any aspiration and 
without any sense of ownership.
11.	
He should prepare a firm seat for himself in a clean 
place, not too high and not too low, covered with 
cloth, animal hide, and kusha grass.
12.	
Sitting there on his seat, fixing his mind on a single 
point, controlling the movements of his mind and 
senses, he should engage in yoga practice in order to 
purify himself.
13.	
Holding his body, head, and neck in a straight line, 
steady and without moving, he should concen-
trate on the point of his nose whilst not looking in 
any direction.
14.	 With his whole being in a state of tranquillity, free of 
fear, steady in his vow of celibacy, controlling his mind, 
with his thoughts concentrated on me, the practi-
tioner should sit there, dedicating himself to me.
15.	
By constantly engaging himself in this way, the yogin 
who controls his mind attains the state of tranquillity, 
which culminates in nirvana and which rests upon me.
16.	 Yoga cannot be practised if one eats excessively or 
does not eat at all, nor if one sleeps too much or 
remains constantly awake.

--- PAGE 107 ---
Chapter 6
99
17.	
The yoga that destroys suffering can be practised if 
one displays moderation in eating, leisure pursuits, 
performance of action, sleeping, and wakefulness.
In these verses, Krishna reveals the techniques to be followed by 
one who seeks higher realisation through the yoga of meditation. 
Similar teachings are found in the Shvetashvatara Upanishad 
(Chapter 2, vv. 8–14), but here a more detailed account is pro-
vided. We may note the following points:
Unlike karma-yoga, this dhyana-yoga is not to be practised 
within the context of human society but in a deserted place 
away from such contact. This might suggest that we have now 
moved on to consider the way of life followed by one who has 
renounced the world to live as a sadhu or monk. This view is 
confirmed in verse 14, which refers to the brahmachari vrata, the 
vow of celibacy, the yogin must undertake as a part of this practice.
Verses 11–13 describe the ideal sitting posture for the yogin as 
he begins to engage in this meditation, and it would seem to be 
very similar to the famous padma asana or lotus position. Here 
it is the holding of the head and body in a straight line that is 
emphasised. In hatha and other forms of yoga, bodily exercises are 
advocated as a means of awakening the dormant Kundalini energy 
and raising it through the different chakras of the subtle body. 
Patañjali does not refer to techniques of this type and despite the 
reference here to asana, it seems that the Bhagavad-gita remains 
similarly focussed on the control of the mind and turning the 
external perception inwards.
In verse 14, Krishna refers to himself as the object of percep-
tion to be sought by one who adopts this process. This could be 
understood as a theistic interpretation of yoga, with the Supreme 
Deity becoming the object of yoga practice. In this way, the 
dhyana-yoga is integrated with the ideas of bhakti, devotion to 
God, that dominate later chapters of the Gita. The teachings of 
the passage as a whole would, however, tend to suggest that in 
this case Shankaracharya is quite right to emphasise the identity 
of Krishna the Deity with the atman within each being. Hence 
we should probably take the idea of thoughts being concentrated 

--- PAGE 108 ---
Bhagavad-gita
100
on Krishna as meaning that one’s meditation should be fixed on 
the atman at the core of one’s own being.
Verse 15 gives us the first idea of the goal that will be attained 
through this yoga practice. Three words or phrases are used to 
describe this result: shanti, nirvana-paramam, and mat-samstham. 
Shanti means peace or inner tranquillity, nirvana-paramam means 
the highest state of nirvana, which is really a general term for 
liberation from rebirth, and mat-samstham means the state in 
which Krishna exists. None of these terms is precise, but they do 
indicate that this yoga practice is a form of moksha-dharma that 
can grant the practitioner liberation from rebirth, and indeed this 
is exactly the goal that Patañjali offers to those who attempt to 
follow the teachings of his Yoga Sutras. Moreover, that condition 
of freedom from rebirth is one of utter tranquillity in which the 
afflictions of the world can no longer touch the liberated soul. 
This is the state in which Krishna himself is always situated, and 
here we can regard Krishna either as a manifestation of Vishnu, 
the Supreme Deity, or the atman within every being, or indeed 
as both of these.
Verses 16 and 17 refer to the lifestyle that must be followed 
by one who is attempting to practice this form of yoga. Again 
there is an emphasis on following a renounced lifestyle that does 
not allow for excessive indulgence in sensual pleasure, but at the 
same time there is a rejection of the extreme mortification of the 
body through harsh austerity. Here again, we might note a link 
between the Gita and the teachings of the Buddha, who similarly 
recommended a ‘middle way’ between austerity and indulgence.
Verses 18–32: The object and the 
goal of meditation
18.	 When a person controls the mind (citta) and fixes it on 
the atman alone, untouched by any desires, he is then 
said to be properly engaged in yoga.
19.	 Yogins who have controlled the mind and who practise 
yoga in relation to the atman have been compared to a 
lamp in a windless place that never flickers.

--- PAGE 109 ---
Chapter 6
101
20.	 When the restrained mind ceases from its activities 
due to the practice of yoga and when the atman is 
perceived by means of one’s own faculties, so that a 
person finds satisfaction within the atman;
21.	 When one experiences that limitless joy, which is 
grasped by the intellect (buddhi) but is beyond the 
range of the senses, and remains fixed on it never 
wavering from that focus;
22.	 Then, after attaining this position, one realises that 
there is nothing superior to what has been achieved; 
when situated in this state of being one cannot be dis-
turbed even by terrible suffering.
23.	 One should understand that what is known as 
yoga amounts to the breaking of the connec-
tion with suffering. Yoga must be performed 
with firm resolve and with a state of mind free 
from despondency.
24.	 This should be done whilst giving up all the desires 
that arise from material inclinations and restraining 
the entire group of senses by means of the mind alone.
25.	
One should undertake this withdrawal little by little, 
using the resolutely focussed intellect. Fixing the 
mind in conjunction with the atman, one should not 
think of any other object.
26.	 One must withdraw the wavering, unsteady mind 
from wherever it wanders and bring it back under 
control, fixed on the atman alone.
27.	 The highest joy comes to that yogin whose mind is 
tranquil, whose passions are quieted, who exists as 
Brahman, and who has no blemish.
28.	 Engaging himself constantly in this pursuit, the yogin 
who is free of blemish easily makes contact with 
Brahman and acquires endless joy.
29.	 One who engages in yoga practice sees the atman 
within all beings and all beings within the atman, 
maintaining this equal vision everywhere.

--- PAGE 110 ---
Bhagavad-gita
102
30.	
For one who sees me everywhere and who sees 
everything as existing within me, I am never lost and 
nor is he ever lost to me.
31.	
Regardless of the way he lives, one who adheres to 
this sense of oneness and worships me as the one situ-
ated within all beings is a yogin who exists in me.
32.	 One who thus sees everyone’s pleasure and suffering 
as the same as his own, Arjuna, is considered to be the 
highest yogin.
Here the Bhagavad-gita describes the higher stages of dhyana-yoga 
when the mind has been brought under control and can be used 
as an effective tool of inner exploration. In this passage, we can 
see very clearly that yoga is indeed a part of the Hindu religious 
quest and is wholly spiritual in its orientation, at least in terms 
of the meditation techniques Krishna reveals here. 
What is the ultimate object on which  
the mind should concentrate?
This passage makes it very clear that the whole of the yoga 
process – beginning from regulation of one’s lifestyle, restraint 
of the senses and control of the mind – culminates in the real-
isation of the atman within one’s own being. We are currently 
unaware of the spiritual nature that is our true identity because 
our senses, mind, and intellect are all directed outwards to the 
external world. But when we gain control over these faculties, 
they can be restrained and turned inwards, and the end result of 
this process is that we gain direct perception of the atman within. 
We may now recall how at the end of Chapter 4, the Gita moved 
its emphasis away from karma-yoga towards realised knowledge 
and how this topic was pursued further in Chapter 5. The yoga 
techniques taught here in Chapter 6 are directly related to this 
discourse on jñana because they provide a means through which 
knowledge of the self can be gained by direct perception of the 
inner reality. This point is emphasised in verses 18, 19, 20, 25, 
and 26, all of which reveal that the object of this yoga process 
is direct knowledge of the atman that is the core of our being.

--- PAGE 111 ---
Chapter 6
103
The result of yoga practice
The immediate result of this realisation is a sense of joy and the 
ending of the suffering that is our usual lot in this world. Here 
again, the Gita seems to share the Buddhist perspective in teach-
ing that this world is a place of suffering (dukka or misery is the 
first of the Buddha’s four noble truths), though it differs markedly 
from Buddhism in revealing the presence of the eternal atman. 
This sense of unbreakable joy is closely related to the notion of 
moksha, a word that literally means ‘release’. We are at present 
in the domain of suffering but knowledge of the atman brings 
us release from this distress; we experience sukham atyantikam 
(‘limitless joy’, v. 21) because the nature of the atman is sac-cid-
ananda – existence, consciousness, and pure bliss.
Verses 25 and 26 suggest that we should not expect this real-
isation of the atman to come immediately. This is not an easy 
process, as Arjuna’s response in verses 33–34 confirms, and suc-
cess will come only gradually as a result of constant and diligent 
practice. The mind is naturally unsteady and the ability to fix 
it in concentration on a single point is rarely achieved. Verse 25 
indicates that there will be many setbacks in the endeavour, but 
a practitioner must continue with the attempt until mastery of 
the mind is finally achieved. Anyone who has tried to practice 
yoga by fixing the concentration on a mantra or a single object of 
vision will confirm how difficult it is to restrain the mind from 
wandering away into its usual pattern of thoughts.
The significance of Krishna’s references to himself
Verses 29 and 30 are significant here, as they make virtually the 
same statements. However, verse 29 is in relation to the atman 
and verse 30 is in relation to Krishna, the speaker. The obvious 
implication is that of identity between the atman and the Deity, 
an idea that Shankaracharya consistently emphasises. Verse 31, 
however, uses the word bhajati, meaning ‘worship’, in relation 
to Krishna who is situated in all beings. This choice of words 
is rather unusual in the present context but does provide the 
beginnings of a link with the discourse on devotion to God 

--- PAGE 112 ---
Bhagavad-gita
104
that begins from Chapter 7. Hence we might suggest that for 
the Bhagavad-gita there is a Supreme Deity who creates and 
controls the world and who is to be worshipped with devotion, 
but this Deity is identical with our own inner self. And finally, 
as something of an aside, we might note that verse 29 makes a 
similar equation between the atman and brahman when it suggests 
that the yogin makes contact with brahman, brahma-samsparsha, 
thereby confirming the Upanishadic view that the atman is brah-
man – ayam atma brahma. 
Verses 33–36: Arjuna’s misgivings about yoga
33.	 Arjuna said: I see no firm status for this yoga you have 
explained as being based on equal-mindedness, Mad-
husudana, because of this unsteadiness.
34.	 The mind is unsteady, Krishna, it is dominating, pow-
erful, and very firm. I think controlling the mind is 
harder to achieve than controlling the wind!
35.	
The Lord said: Without doubt, O mighty one, the 
mind is flickering and difficult to restrain. But 
through constant endeavour and renunciation it can 
be restrained, Kaunteya.
36.	
In my opinion it is difficult for a person who lacks 
self-control to follow the path of yoga. But one who 
makes this endeavour after achieving self-mastery is 
able to do so by employing the proper means.
This passage is quite straightforward, though it is important to 
note both Arjuna’s objection here and also Krishna’s response to 
it. Arjuna’s point is that the yoga system Krishna has just outlined 
is too difficult; the mind is so powerful that it cannot be brought 
under volitional control simply by an effort of the will. Again one 
might see here something of an introduction to the teachings on 
bhakti, devotion to God, for there we find that the Deity himself 
intervenes in the process and delivers his devotee so that one does 
not have to rely solely on one’s own mental prowess.
Here, however, Krishna does not accept Arjuna’s objection. 
This dhyana-yoga is certainly a difficult path to follow, but if one 

--- PAGE 113 ---
Chapter 6
105
can achieve self-mastery then it is not at all impossible, as Arjuna 
is suggesting. The key to success is given in verse 35 – abhyasena 
tu kaunteya vairagyena cha grihyate. The mind can be controlled 
through abhyasa, constant regulated practice, and through vai-
ragya, proper renunciation of worldly aspirations. In other words, 
Krishna is saying that this is not a cheap or easy process of spiritual 
endeavour, but if one is serious and dedicated it is possible to gain 
the highest goals by the means he has revealed in this chapter.
Verses 37–47: The fate of the yogin who falls short
37.	
Arjuna said: A person who does not endeavour 
enough but is endowed with faith may be distracted 
from yoga by the fluctuations of the mind and so fail 
to gain the goal of yoga. What result does he achieve, 
Krishna?
38.	 With both his aims unachieved, is he not lost like a 
divided cloud without any real position, O mighty 
one, deluded from the path to Brahman?
39.	 You should completely dispel this doubt of mine, 
Krishna. Except for yourself, there is no one who can 
dispel it.
40.	 The Lord said: Neither here nor in the next world, 
Partha, is such a person ever lost. No one who does 
good will ever attain a bad result thereby.
41.	 After reaching the worlds enjoyed by the righteous 
and residing there for innumerable years, the failed 
yogin takes birth in the house of pure-hearted, pros-
perous people. 
42.	 Or he may be born into a family of yogins, possessed 
of wisdom. A birth in this world of that type is very 
rarely attained.
43.	 There he regains the state of consciousness he 
achieved in his previous body and once more endeav-
ours for perfection, O child of the Kurus.
44.	 He is drawn in that direction even against his will due 
to the regulated practice he previously undertook. 

--- PAGE 114 ---
Bhagavad-gita
106
Even a person who merely attempts to gain an under-
standing of yoga transcends the teachings of the Veda.
45.	
Through his continuous endeavour, the yogin, engaged 
in his practice and purified of faults, will gain perfec-
tion after several births and then proceed to the high-
est destination.
46.	 The yogin is superior to one who undertakes auster-
ity. He is also regarded as being superior to one who 
possesses knowledge and to one who performs ritual 
action. Therefore, Arjuna, become a yogin.
47.	
And of all yogins, he who has faith and who worships 
me with his inner-self absorbed in me is the most 
advanced in yoga. That is my opinion.
Here again we have an inquiry from Arjuna, which really follows 
on from his previous expression of doubt about the viability of 
the dhyana-yoga process. His point is that because this spiritual 
path is so fraught with difficulty, there will be some practitioners 
who fall short in their endeavours and fail to achieve the ultimate 
goal. What is the fate of such persons? They have given up their 
worldly aspirations to seek spiritual rewards and so if they fail 
in their yogic endeavours they are doubly the losers and end up 
with nothing at all.
Responding to this question, Krishna makes a very significant 
point not just for our understanding of yoga practice but Hindu 
religious thought as a whole. Because Indian religion generally 
includes a belief in reincarnation, complete spiritual success in 
the present lifetime is not absolutely essential, as it is for most 
followers of Western religions. If we fail to achieve absolute per-
fection in this life, the progress we have made is not lost and in 
our next birth we can take up the path once more and build on 
the progress previously made. And if we look ahead to the next 
chapter (verse 3), we will see that in fact it is only a very small 
number of aspirants who do achieve moksha in the present life. 
So Hindu spirituality is a gradual, progressive process extending 
over a number of lifetimes as we move towards the final goal. 
And I would suggest that this is one of the reasons that Hindus 

--- PAGE 115 ---
Chapter 6
107
are more tolerant of diversity than is sometimes the case in world 
religions. Hinduism can readily accept that different persons are 
at different stages of spiritual progression and so require different 
forms of religion to take them forward. Here this point is very 
clearly made in a manner that fully answers Arjuna’s misgivings 
and at the same makes a significant point about Hindu spirituality 
as a whole. There are a number of further points that we might 
also note here:
The worlds of the righteous, the punya-kritam lokan, mentioned 
in verse 41 are almost certainly the worlds of the Vedic gods. 
These ‘heavens’ are frequently mentioned in the Mahabharata 
and the Puranas as the destination achieved by those who live 
righteously and adhere to dharma. This is not moksha, however, as 
those who gain elevation to these worlds must ultimately return 
to earth and resume the cycle of rebirth. It seems that the failed 
practitioner of yoga is first rewarded by existence in these worlds 
and is then able to resume his spiritual progress after taking birth 
again in this world.
Verse 44 suggests that a person is attracted towards spiritual mat-
ters at least partially as a result of endeavours made in a previous 
life. We see that some people have an almost instinctive attraction 
for spiritual pursuits while others remain entirely indifferent to 
the religious way of life. The indication here is that these varying 
dispositions are a result of one’s previous existence, which shapes 
the nature of the subtle body in which the soul transmigrates.
Verse 45 indicates that even if a person commits himself to the 
path of dhyana-yoga, it may take several births before perfection 
is achieved. This is indeed a slow and arduous path to follow.
In verse 46, the statement that the yogin is superior to the 
jñanin, the one who possesses knowledge, might strike us as 
rather unusual. After all, the practice of the yoga of meditation 
has been shown to be a means of gaining knowledge. Shankara-
charya explains that here the word jñanin refers to one who has 
theoretical knowledge derived from scripture but not the realised 
knowledge of the self that leads to moksha. Ramanuja agrees with 
Shankara on this point and suggests that the knowledge referred 

--- PAGE 116 ---
Bhagavad-gita
108
to here means ‘knowledge of different subjects’. In other words, 
the jñanin mentioned here is a learned scholar rather than an 
enlightened person.
In the last verse of the chapter, we again find that the dis-
course moves on to discuss the worship of God, just as it did 
in the last verse of Chapter 5. The statement here is interesting 
for our understanding of the Gita as a whole, for we are now 
informed that one who worships Krishna is the best of all yogins. 
From this, we must presume that the devotee is in a better posi-
tion even than one who undertakes the dhyana-yoga revealed in 
this chapter. So just as we had indications that the acquisition 
of realised knowledge is the next stage after karma-yoga, here 
the suggestion is that bhakti, devotion to God, is the next stage 
beyond the acquisition of higher knowledge. Many Hindus 
believe that jñana is the goal attained through bhakti, but the 
Bhagavad-gita does not appear to share this view as it consist-
ently refers to bhakti as the highest form of spirituality. Again 
one might suggest that this verse is a later addition as it seems 
to be in contrast to the previous teachings of the chapter. Here, 
however, it marks a fundamental transition in the progression 
of the Gita’s discourse, setting the tone for the chapters we will 
next encounter.
Linking the Bhagavad-gita to the Yoga Sutras
At the beginning of Chapter 6, I referred to the eight limbs of 
yoga delineated by Patañjali in his Yoga Sutras. Below, I have com-
piled a list that shows how the Gita’s yoga teachings in Chapter 6 
appear to refer to each of the eight limbs. This is not necessarily 
the ‘right’ answer as the link between the Bhagavad-gita and 
the Yoga Sutras is not exact, but I hope it shows how the Gita is 
closely related to the classical yoga-darshan of Patañjali.
Yama and Niyama 
In his Yoga Sutras, Patañjali gives lists of five yamas and five niyamas, 
which are restraints from sensual indulgence and the practise 
of designated virtues. The topic is not dealt with in the same 
systematic manner in the Bhagavad-gita, but in the opening ten 

--- PAGE 117 ---
Chapter 6
109
verses we do see a similar insistence on the necessity of regulating 
one’s personal conduct as a prerequisite for the practice of yoga. 
Later on, verse 14 refers to the vow of celibacy, which is one of 
Patañjali’s five yamas, and in verses 16 and 17, we find further 
reference to the necessity of a controlled, regulated lifestyle.
Asana 
Verses 11–13 describe how the seat should be established and 
then the ideal posture to be adopted by one who is practising 
dhyana-yoga.
Pranayama 
The sixth chapter of the Gita does not include any reference to 
pranayama in its discourse, though elsewhere this element of yoga 
is noted, as in 4.29–30, 5.27 and 8.10–12. It is hard to say why 
pranayama is overlooked in Chapter 6, though we must be aware 
that Krishna is here providing only a summary of the techniques 
rather than an exhaustive treatise.
Pratyahara
The withdrawal of the senses from the process of external per-
ception is an essential prerequisite for turning one’s concentration 
inwards. This is referred to in verse 24 where the phrase indri-
ya-gramam viniyamya is used, meaning restraining the collection of 
senses. Krishna also refers to controlling the mind and drawing 
it back under control – as in verse 26 – and this includes restraint 
of the senses from external perception.
Dharana
Before internal meditation can be successfully performed, the 
mind must be regulated so that it remains fixed on a single point 
without any deviation. This is probably what is indicated in verses 
12 and 13, where Krishna says that the yogin must concentrate 
on the point of the nose and become unaware of all directions. 
The idea here is that the mind is focussed so rigidly on a single 
point that its perception of everything else is suspended. The 
process referred to in verse 26 also seems to be one of dharana, 
whereby the practitioner repeatedly draws back the wandering 
mind and by an effort of will forces it to remain concentrated 
on a single object.

--- PAGE 118 ---
Bhagavad-gita
110
Dhyana
When the mind is brought under strict control by the practice 
of dharana, it can then be used as a tool for the realisation of the 
atman within one’s own being. The Bhagavad-gita places a lot of 
its emphasis on this higher realisation as the goal of yoga practice. 
Verses 20–26 refer several times to the fixing of the mind on the 
atman, and it is this higher perception that is meant by the term 
dhyana (which incidentally is used in Tibetan Buddhism, where 
it becomes ‘zen’ rather than dhyana).
Samadhi 
When the yoga practice reaches a successful conclusion, the state 
known as samadhi is attained. This is the position of spiritual 
enlightenment in which the adept leaves behind the illusion of 
worldly existence and perceives the reality of his own spiritual 
identity. In Chapter 6 of the Bhagavad-gita, this is referred to 
as a state of unlimited joy and realised knowledge. We could say 
that verses 27–32 all refer to the condition of samadhi in which 
a different perception of existence is attained and the world as 
we now know it is transcended.
Conclusion: A Summary of Chapter 6
Chapter 6 of the Bhagavad-gita is dominated by the discussion of 
dhyana-yoga, the yoga of meditation, which Krishna presents here 
as the next stage in the consideration of spiritual knowledge that 
has been a major topic in Chapters 4 and 5. The opening verses 
refer again to the progression from karma-yoga to jñana and the 
internal renunciation of worldly desires as a prerequisite for the 
practice of dhyana-yoga. We are then given a brief outline of the 
practice, which consists of sitting in the correct posture, with-
drawing the mind and senses from the external world and then 
fixing the perception unwaveringly on a single point. Through 
this practice the mind is brought under the control of the intellect 
and can then be used as a tool for meditation. When the mind is 
turned inwards, it eventually comes to perceive the soul that is 
our true identity and becomes wholly absorbed in this realisation, 
experiencing the limitless joy that is an inherent quality of the 

--- PAGE 119 ---
Chapter 6
111
spirit. At this point, the knowledge Krishna has been referring to 
earlier is no longer theoretical but is based on direct perception 
and enlightened realisation. In the final verses of the chapter, 
Arjuna expresses doubts as to whether this process of controlling 
the mind is actually possible, and asks about the fate of one who 
endeavours on this path but fails to achieve its ultimate goal. 
Krishna responds by asserting that this process may be difficult 
but it is not impossible if one is dedicated to following it. And 
even if one fails to achieve success in the present life, any gain 
or progress that has been made will provide a basis for further 
endeavours in the next life.

--- PAGE 120 ---

--- PAGE 121 ---

113
Chapter 7
A
t the end of the sixth chapter, we saw how Krishna 
suddenly ended his discourse on dhyana-yoga and seemed 
to indicate that there is a form of spirituality that is 
even higher than the karma-yoga and realised knowledge he has 
previously taught. In the last verse of Chapter 6, he asserted 
that the one who is best situated in yoga (yuktattama) is one 
who worships Krishna himself with faith – shraddhavan bhajate 
yo mam. This sudden change of emphasis sets the tone for the 
very different teachings we will now encounter, which focus on 
the position of the Supreme Deity as the creator and controller 
of the world and on the spiritual path based on loving devotion 
to that Deity. This is the way of bhakti, and here again we see 
why the Bhagavad-gita is such an important work in establishing 
Hindu religious doctrine.
In traditional and contemporary Hinduism, the idea of worship, 
devotion, and love dedicated to the Supreme Deity is one that 
predominates in the minds of most believers. The Upanishads 
speak of the higher knowledge of the self that is identical with 
Brahman, the ultimate reality, but they have little or nothing to 
say about worship, love of God, or devotion. Indeed, in some 
passages the Upanishads appear to reject any such notion. But 
in the Bhagavad-gita, this form of spirituality is brought to the 
fore in a most dramatic manner as Krishna’s role is transformed 
from that of teacher of religion to the Supreme Lord of all cre-
ation. Up until this point, the focus of the Gita’s teaching has 
been on self-transformation. Arjuna has been urged to renounce 
his selfish desires so as to break free from the bondage of future 

--- PAGE 122 ---
Bhagavad-gita
114
karma and then to seek out knowledge of his own spiritual iden-
tity. Here, however, we find the introduction of a very different 
idea, that of an external Deity who will respond to our prayers 
and worship, and who will bless and guide us in this world even 
to the ultimate stage of moksha, which is now revealed not so 
much as a goal we strive to achieve ourselves but as a gift of God, 
granted to those he loves as an act of divine grace. So much of 
what is referred to as Hinduism is based on this idea of divine 
love, and its original philosophical basis is to be found here in 
the Bhagavad-gita.
Verses 1–7: Krishna as the source of the world
1.	
The Lord said: Now hear, O Partha, how you can 
have full knowledge of me without any doubts by 
attaching your mind to me and practising yoga dedi-
cated to me.
2.	
I shall explain to you in full both the jñana and the 
vijñana. When this is understood there is nothing else 
remaining that should be known.
3.	
Amongst thousands of men only one will endeavour 
for perfection, and amongst those who do endeavour 
and achieve that goal, only one will come to know 
me in truth.
4.	
Earth, water, fire, air, space, mind, intellect, and the 
sense of ego comprise the eight component parts of 
my energy known as prakriti. 
5.	
This is the inferior prakriti, but you should also know 
about my higher prakriti, which is distinct from it. 
This is the element of life, O mighty one, the jiva 
bhuta, by means of which this world is held in place.
6.	
You should understand that these two are the origin, 
the womb of all living beings. I am the source of the 
entire world and its passing away as well.
7.	
There is no other thing superior to me, Dhanamjaya. 
As jewels are strung on their thread so this whole 
world is strung upon me.

--- PAGE 123 ---
Chapter 7
115
The difference between jñana and vijñana
These are very difficult terms to define at this preliminary stage. 
As we have noted earlier, jñana means realised knowledge of 
spiritual truth, and here one must presume it refers to knowl-
edge about Krishna, as this is what is indicated by the first 
verse. Krishna is no longer talking about the atman as he did in 
Chapter 6 but has turned the discussion towards knowledge of 
his own identity. The term vijñana here is slightly problematic. 
It is a word that is still used in modern Indian languages to 
mean technical or practical knowledge – computer science or 
car mechanics, for example. So in that sense jñana and vijñana 
could be theoretical and practical knowledge. For Madhvacha-
rya, jñana means basic knowledge and vijñana is a more detailed 
exposition; for Ramanuja vijñana means the specific knowledge 
by which God can be distinguished from the world; and for 
Shankara jñana is theoretical knowledge and vijñana is realised 
knowledge. All of these are possible, but I would suggest that 
jñana refers to philosophical understanding of the nature of God, 
whilst vijñana indicates the practice one should undertake in light 
of that knowledge; this explanation recommends itself primarily 
because this is what the Gita’s next set of teachings consists of – 
understanding God’s supremacy, and religious action based on 
this knowledge of the Deity. We will refer again to these two 
types of teachings.
Verse 3 is noteworthy in that it explains that the spiritual path 
is one that is only rarely trodden and, secondly, that knowledge 
of Krishna is the ultimate goal of this path. One could take this 
to mean that knowledge of the atman (and perhaps its identity 
as Brahman) is the highest goal, but there also seems to be a 
suggestion here that bhakti stands above even knowledge of 
the atman.
Defining the term ‘prakriti’
In verses 4–6, Krishna refers to two types of prakriti. The word 
prakriti is usually used to indicate matter as opposed to spirit, but 
here the apara or lower prakriti refers to matter, whilst the para or 

--- PAGE 124 ---
Bhagavad-gita
116
higher prakriti is the jiva-bhuta, which is a term used for the atman 
whilst it exists within the body. The material energy is shown 
here to be eightfold: the five great elements of earth, water, fire, 
air, and space, and then the three components of our mentality, 
mind, intellect, and ahamkara, the sense of ego. We must pre-
sume that the higher prakriti here refers to the atman existing 
within its material embodiment; this is the jiva-bhuta, and all 
living beings exist as a combination of these two prakritis. Above 
and beyond them both, however, is the Deity identified here as 
Krishna himself. They are both his energies and he is the creator 
and the destroyer of the world. So here we encounter an idea 
stressed in the Shvetashvatara Upanishad, which indicates three 
eternal principles: matter, the individual soul and the Supreme 
Deity who presides over them. This is jñana in relation to God; 
the vijñana is to come.
The metaphor of the jewels and the thread
I think verse 7 is a very important one for all people to reflect 
upon. In this world, we see that there is an order that prevents 
the onset of chaos. The world moves forward in accordance 
with designated rules, and yet we cannot perceive the principle 
of existence which directly sustains that order. Similarly, a neck-
lace of jewels is held in place by the invisible thread that is its 
sustaining principle; if the thread is broken, chaos immediately 
ensues. Here Krishna proclaims himself to be the invisible thread 
that sustains the order of the world. He is invisible to us but he 
is present here within the world and without that presence the 
world could not continue. This notion of the transcendent Deity 
being immanent yet invisible within the world is one that dom-
inates the Gita’s theology and is ultimately revealed to Arjuna 
when the vishva-rupa is displayed in Chapter 11. This verse is also 
very significant in demonstrating that Hindu teachings can be 
monotheistic. Here Krishna says very clearly, mattah parataram 
na anyat kimcid asti, which means, ‘There is nothing else that is 
superior to myself’, thereby establishing one of the fundamental 
principles of a monotheistic theology.

--- PAGE 125 ---
Chapter 7
117
Verses 8–15: Krishna’s presence within the world
8.	
I am flavour in water, Kaunteya. I am the effulgence 
in the moon and the sun. I am Pranava (Om) in all 
the Vedas, I am sound in space and manliness in men.
9.	
And I am the primal aroma in earth; I am the heat in 
fire. I am life in all living beings; I am the austerity of 
those who undertake such austerities.
10.	 You should know me as the eternal seed of all beings, 
Partha. I am the intelligence of those who are intelli-
gent; I am the energy of all energetic sources.
11.	
And I am the power of the powerful when it is 
devoid of desire and passion. I am desire in living 
beings, O best of the Bharatas, when it does not 
transgress dharma.
12.	 You should understand that the states of existence 
based on sattva, rajas, and on tamas come into being 
from me. But I am not in them; they are in Me.
13.	
Being deluded by these three states of being, in which 
the three gunas are inherent, the whole world cannot 
understand me, for I am beyond all three states and I 
am undecaying (avyaya).
14.	 This divine maya of mine consisting of the gunas is 
difficult to go beyond, but those who surrender to me 
alone cross beyond this maya.
15.	
The wrongdoers, the foolish, the lowest of men, per-
sons whose knowledge is taken away by illusion 
(maya) and those who take to the asuric form of exis-
tence do not surrender to Me.
This passage can be divided into three phases.
Verses 8–11 are included as an illustration of the point made 
by Krishna in verse 7. He pervades the world and it is his pres-
ence that makes the world what it is. He is the essential nature 
of the various aspects of the world around us. This again is an 
important point and one that distinguishes Hindu monotheism 
from that of Christianity, Islam, and Judaism. In those faiths the 
one God exists on high in a domain that is wholly distinct from 

--- PAGE 126 ---
Bhagavad-gita
118
this world. But here we see that God is not only the creator of 
the world but he is also present within the world as its invisible 
sustaining principle. He is both transcendent and immanent. 
Perhaps we should not be too preoccupied with looking for a 
literal meaning here; the verses are probably better understood 
as a poetic form of expression that illustrates and illuminates the 
theological truth revealed in verse 7.
Verse 12 provides a succinct summary of the main point that 
is being made here. All the states of existence we can observe in 
the world, which are shaped by the three qualities of sattva, rajas, 
and tamas, arise ultimately from out of the Deity himself. Here 
the word mattah means ‘from me’. The last line here refines the 
understanding still further; God is not present in these mani-
festations (na tv aham teshu), but they are present within him (te 
mayi). Shankara, Madhva, and Ramanuja all explain this in terms 
of dependence. Krishna may be present as the world but he is 
not dependent on the existence of the world for his existence. 
However, the world is entirely dependent upon him. Another 
interpretation could be that although the world exists as a part of 
his existence and is within him, his existence expands far beyond 
the range of the world and hence his full presence is not here. 
Thus, there is identity between the world and God but it is not a 
symmetrical identity; the world is nothing but a manifestation of 
God, but he himself is the world and more than the world. The 
word maya is often understood in the sense of magic or delusion, 
but it is also used to refer to prakriti, the material energy, and it 
is probably used here in this latter sense.
In verses 13–15, we get the first hint of the implications of 
gaining (and not gaining) this understanding of the nature of 
God. Perhaps here we see the beginning of a move from jñana 
to vijñana, from theoretical knowledge about God towards the 
practical implications of this knowledge in terms of the way we 
live. Those who do not understand the presence of Krishna in 
the world are deluded by the three gunas – sattva, rajas, and tamas 
– mentioned in verse 12. Krishna himself is beyond these qualities 
and here again we see the meaning of what has been said before; 

--- PAGE 127 ---
Chapter 7
119
the material world exists entirely within the existence of Krishna, 
and yet he transcends the world as well. The different groups of 
people who are thus deluded are defined in verse 15 as being of 
four types. They are the lowest of men, the rough, ill-mannered, 
violent, and materialistic people. As the Katha Upanishad states, 
such people cannot acquire spiritual enlightenment, and con-
versely, when one has the higher knowledge it is immediately 
reflected in personal conduct. Here also we get the first hint of 
how a person will respond when he gains this knowledge of God, 
and this is contained within the word prapadyante used in verses 
14 and 15. Prapadyante means to surrender, to take shelter of and 
to become dependent upon, and this notion forms one of the 
main strands of Ramanuja’s religious teachings for he consistently 
stresses prapanna, absolute surrender, as a spiritual goal. He teaches 
that if one becomes wholly dependent upon the grace of God, 
then God will certainly bestow his mercy on such a devotee 
and deliver him from all the difficulties we face. This point is 
graphically confirmed at the end of the Gita (18.66) in a verse that 
is highly revered by the Shri Vaishnavas who follow Ramanuja. 
And here also in verse 14, there is a suggestion of divine grace. 
This world is very difficult to cross over, as Arjuna asserted at 
the end of Chapter 6, but one who surrenders to Krishna can 
indeed cross over it. How can this be? It is explained later in 
12.7 and 18.66 that surrender invokes the grace of God and that 
grace has the power to easily deliver the devotee from the ocean 
of birth and death – mrityu-samsara-sagarat (12.7).
Verses 16–19: The four types of devotee
16.	 There are four types of righteous person who worship 
Me, Arjuna: one who is in distress, one who wishes to 
understand, one who seeks prosperity, and the jñanin 
who possesses knowledge, O best of the Bharatas.
17.	
Amongst these four the jñanin who is always properly 
engaged and has one-pointed devotion is the best. I 
am very dear to such a jñanin and he is dear to me.
18.	 They are all noble persons but I regard the jñanin as 

--- PAGE 128 ---
Bhagavad-gita
120
my very self (atma). He is unwavering in dedicating 
himself to me alone as his ultimate goal. 
19.	 At the end of many births one who possesses knowl-
edge finally resorts to me, realising, ‘Vasudeva is all 
things.’ Such a mahatma is very rarely found.
Four types of sukritins, righteous persons
It is recognised that people may engage in acts of worship, or 
puja, for a variety of different reasons, sometimes for material 
gain and sometimes for motives that are entirely spiritual. This 
applies today just as much as it did at the time the Bhagavad-gita 
was spoken. The point made here is that even if the worship is 
performed in pursuit of material gain, the performer is still to 
be regarded as a righteous person. He is a sukritin in contrast 
to the dushkritins mentioned in the previous verse who never 
worship the Deity.
‘I am very dear to such a jñanin and he is dear to me.’
Here we see an expansion of the concept of bhakti that has been 
introduced so far. Up until this point, we have been told that 
one who understands the presence of God within the world will 
surrender to him – mam prapadyante. Here, however, the word 
priya is introduced, which suggests a relationship between the 
Deity and the devotee based on mutual love – priyo hi jñanino 
‘tyartham aham, I am an object of love for the jñanin – and by way 
of reciprocation, sa cha me priyah, he is loved by me. This idea 
of a loving relationship with God is one that flowers in later 
expressions of devotional Hinduism, epitomised in the poetry of 
Mirabai or the Tamil Alvars, but here again we find the origins 
of another form Hindu spirituality contained within the Gita.
How might one interpret the meaning of verse 18?
One might take a literal reading here and suggest that jñani tv 
atmaiva me, the jñanin is my very self, confirms the Upanishadic 
view of the individual atman achieving a state of absolute unity 
with Brahman. This is Shankaracharya’s reading of it and he 

--- PAGE 129 ---
Chapter 7
121
summarises the jñanin’s realisation as being, ‘I myself am the 
Lord Vasudeva, I am none else.’ The Vaishnava commentators, 
however, do not share this view. For Ramanuja, the verse means 
that the devotee and the Lord are united in love because they 
cannot bear to be apart from one another, whilst Madhva explains 
that it means, ‘being most beloved of him’. This is a slightly less 
literal interpretation, but given the context it is no less valid.
What is the significance of the ideas expressed in verse 19?
Firstly, verse 19 reveals again the immanence of God as being 
present within the world as was first indicated in verse 7 and 
will later be revealed directly in the manifestation of the vish-
va-rupa (Chapter 11). There is also a suggestion here that bhakti, or 
devotion, is the next stage on from realised knowledge in terms 
of spiritual progression. We have seen that karma-yoga provides 
the requisite mood of renunciation for the pursuit of realised 
knowledge, but here we are told that one who possesses such 
knowledge moves to the position of prapanna only after many 
births when he comes to realise that Vasudeva, a name for Vishnu 
or Narayana, is all things – vasudeva sarvam. Shankara naturally 
takes this as meaning that Vasudeva or Krishna is the atman. And 
as the atman is non-different from Brahman, then there is no 
problem in reconciling this verse with his Advaitic philosophy.
Verses 20–23: Worshipping other gods
20.	 But those bereft of knowledge due to their pursuit of 
this or that desire surrender to other gods, accepting 
the appropriate discipline for worship as dictated by 
their own inner nature.
21.	 Whatever the form the devotee wishes to faith-
fully worship, I bestow upon him the firm faith that 
enables him to do so.
22.	 When endowed with such faith he then engages in 
the worship of that god and as a result attains what he 
desires. These desired objects are, however, granted by 
me alone.

--- PAGE 130 ---
Bhagavad-gita
122
23.	 The results of the worship performed by such unintel-
ligent persons are all temporary. The worshippers of 
the gods go to the gods; my devotees come to me.
I stated above that this chapter of the Bhagavad-gita reveals a 
monotheistic understanding of the nature of God, but this is 
a peculiarly Indian form of monotheism, which is completely 
compatible with polytheism. Although there is only one Supreme 
Deity, there are also lesser gods, the devas, who have power over 
our existence and yet are still mortal beings who exist subject 
to the laws of nature. These have already been referred to in 
Chapters 2 and 3, and are the objects of praise and worship for 
the hymns of the Veda. So what about the person who chooses 
to worship these Vedic gods rather than Krishna himself, as has 
been instructed so far in this chapter? Here, the answer is given.
Worship of other gods is not condemned outright, but those 
who perform such worship are referred to as hrita-jñana, devoid 
of proper knowledge, and alpa-medhas, having little intelligence. 
Hence, there is no prohibition but the practice is hardly approved 
of here.	
The tendency to worship a particular god or goddess is derived 
from a person’s nature, which dictates the mode of conduct one 
is drawn towards. In verse 20, it is indicated that worship of 
the gods is based on material desire, or kama, whilst the words 
prakritya niyata svaya indicate that one is almost compelled to act 
in this way as a result of the nature one is born with.
Although he does not particularly approve of this worship, it 
is Krishna who facilitates it from within. He is in the heart of 
every being and he guides a person in the direction that most 
suits his or her inherent nature, and that includes religious life 
as well. Moreover, although the rewards gained from religious 
practice appear to be granted by the gods, as indicated earlier 
in Chapter 3 (vv. 11–13), it is actually Krishna himself who 
grants them as he is the ultimate controller of the world and 
of the gods.
It is sometimes said that one can worship any deity one is 
drawn to and the result will be the same, as all gods are symbolic 

--- PAGE 131 ---
Chapter 7
123
manifestations of the same ultimate reality. The Bhagavad-gita 
does not appear to share that view, and in verse 23 it is stated 
that those who worship Krishna and those who worship the 
Vedic gods achieve a very different result. I think the point here 
is that as he did in Chapter 2 (vv. 42–45), Krishna is anxious to 
distinguish the spiritual path he is advocating from the Vedic 
rituals of the karma-kanda. One might confuse the way of bhakti 
Krishna is teaching here with worship of the Vedic gods, and the 
Gita is anxious to show that they are not part of the same process.
Verses 24–30: Perception of Krishna
24.	 Those who lack intelligence think of me as a 
non-manifest entity taking a manifest form. They 
do not know my higher nature, which is unfading 
and unsurpassed.
25.	
I am not manifest to all because I am concealed by 
yogamaya. So this deluded world does not compre-
hend me, the one who is unborn and unfading.
26.	 I know the living beings of the past, the present, and 
the future, Arjuna, but there is no one who knows me.
27.	 Through the illusion of duality, Bharata, arising from 
desire and loathing, all living beings in this created 
world pass into a state of ignorance, Paramtapa.
28.	 But persons whose wickedness has reached an end 
and who are engaged in virtuous acts become free 
from the illusion of duality. They worship me and 
remain firm in their vows.
29.	 Those who resort to me and thereby endeavour 
for liberation (moksha) from old age and death fully 
understand Brahman and have complete knowledge 
of adhyatma and of action (karma).
30.	 Those who also know me in relation to the adhibhuta, 
the adhidaiva, and the adhiyajña can, with their con-
sciousness fixed, know me even at the time of death.
These verses take us back to the imperceptible presence of Krishna, 
the invisible thread that sustains the order of the world. 

--- PAGE 132 ---
Bhagavad-gita
124
Interpreting the meaning of verse 24
The ‘non-manifest entity taking a manifest form’ probably refers 
to the imperceptible soul assuming a bodily identity, which is the 
condition of living beings in this world. This is Shankaracharya’s 
interpretation. If we accept this view, then the meaning of the 
verse becomes clear. Foolish people (a-buddhi) regard Krishna as 
an ordinary mortal being and fail to realise that he has a higher 
identity (param bhavam). Here, it seems that it is the avatar form 
that is being discussed and one might even suggest that the verse 
is making an oblique reference to the Mahabharata narrative in 
which the Pandavas accept Krishna’s divinity, whilst Duryodhana 
and his faction refuse to accept that he is anything more than 
an ordinary person.
Why are people unaware of Krishna?
The reason given is that living beings in this world have their 
higher knowledge covered over by ignorance. This is referred to 
in verse 25 as yogamaya and in verse 27 as dvamdva-moha. Yogamaya 
is a rather tricky phrase to interpret. The word maya can be used 
as a synonym for prakriti, meaning matter or nature, and if this 
interpretation is accepted, yoga-maya-samavrittah might mean that 
Krishna is concealed because the people of this world see only the 
material manifestation and not the higher reality that lies behind 
it. This view is supported by the phrase dvamdva-moha, which 
means the illusion of duality or the materialistic consciousness 
that perceives the world in terms of happiness and distress, good 
and bad. On the other hand, maya can also mean magic or trick-
ery, and it is just possible that Krishna is saying here that when 
he appears in a human guise as an avatar, he uses his mystical 
powers to delude the world and cover over his divine identity. 
This interpretation would again seem to relate primarily to the 
role played by Krishna in the stories of the Mahabharata.
How does one get knowledge of Krishna?
It is interesting to note that verse 28 recommends moral conduct 
and righteous activities as the means one should adopt in order to 

--- PAGE 133 ---
Chapter 7
125
break free of this illusion. This is referred to as anta-gatam papam, 
sin being at an end, and punya-karmanam, engaging in righteous 
activities. This refers back to the assertion in verse 15 that those 
who are wicked and low-minded do not surrender to Krishna, 
and to the statement of the Katha Upanishad (2.24) that wicked 
persons never realise the atman. 
I have purposely refrained from discussing the final two verses 
of the chapter because they contain difficult terminology and are 
hence hard to comprehend without further elucidation. This is 
the case for Arjuna as well, and at the beginning of the eighth 
chapter we find him asking Krishna to explain exactly what 
he means by his concluding words here. So we will postpone 
that discussion until we have looked at Krishna’s explanation 
in Chapter 8.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 7
Chapter 7 marks a dramatic change of direction in the teachings 
of the Bhagavad-gita as Krishna brings himself to the forefront 
of the discourse and verbally reveals his own identity as the one 
Supreme Deity. This is a very different form of spirituality to 
what has gone before. The earlier chapters of the Gita focus on 
self-transformation and gaining moksha by means of renunciation 
of desire and knowledge of the inner self. Now, however, the 
focus is on the nature of an external Deity who creates, con-
trols, and pervades the world, and on the worship of that Deity. 
Moksha is still the ultimate goal but now that goal is attained 
not by self-transformation and self-knowledge but by the bless-
ing of the Deity. At the beginning of the chapter, three eternal 
principles are established: matter, the individual soul, and the 
Deity who controls both of these. That Deity is present within 
this world and is in fact the fundamental basis that allows it to 
exist; most people are unaware of his existence because they are 
under the sway of ignorance and illusion. Those who are right-
eous, however, worship Krishna, and the wise devotee forms a 
relationship with him based on mutual love. This worship is not 
the same as that offered to the Vedic gods, although that worship 

--- PAGE 134 ---
Bhagavad-gita
126
is dependent upon Krishna and the rewards gained are ultimately 
bestowed by Krishna as well. So Krishna is present in this world 
both as an avatar and as the all-pervasive supreme principle that 
sustains the order of the world. The fools will never know of his 
presence, but those who are righteous may come to know him 
and ultimately surrender to his grace.

--- PAGE 135 ---

127
Chapter 8
T
he eighth chapter of the Bhagavad-gita follows a direction 
that is set primarily by questions from Arjuna, which in 
turn are prompted by the rather obscure instructions with 
which Krishna concluded Chapter 7. Brief definitions are given 
for some of the terminology employed there, but the crucial 
issue that is raised relates to the statement made in verse 30 of 
Chapter 7 to the effect that even at the time of death – praya-
na-kale – persons whose minds are properly engaged can have 
knowledge of Krishna. In verse 2 of Chapter 8, Arjuna picks 
up on that point and asks for further explanation. It is this 
point that then becomes the predominant topic for the chap-
ter as a whole. It is not quite the case that the main subject of 
the nature of God and worship of God is forgotten here, and 
yet there is a sense that this chapter is a slight deviation from 
the main theme of the discourse, which is picked up again in 
Chapter 9 when Arjuna’s question about the time of death has 
been fully answered.
Verses 1–4: Some definitions
1.	
Arjuna said: What is that Brahman? What is adhy-
atma? What is karma, O Purushottama? And what 
is it that is defined as adhibhuta? What is it that is 
called adhidaiva?
2.	
What is the adhiyajña, O Madhusudana, and how is 
it present within this body? And how are you to 
be known at the time of death by those who have 
attained self-mastery?

--- PAGE 136 ---
Bhagavad-gita
128
3.	
The Lord said: That which decays not (akshara) is the 
Supreme Brahman; it is one’s inherent nature (sva-
bhava) that is referred to as adhyatma. The creative 
force producing the existence of living beings is 
known as karma.
4.	
Adhibhuta is the existence that decays (kshara-bhava), 
and adhidaiva is the soul within (purusha). I alone 
am the adhiyajña here in this body, O best of 
embodied beings.
Arjuna’s questions in the first two verses are inspired by the 
language Krishna used at the end of Chapter 7. There, it was 
said that persons who pursue the goal of moksha come to exist 
as Brahman and understand the concepts of adhyatma and karma. 
They also come to know Krishna in relation to adhibhuta, adhid-
aiva, and adhiyajña. So now, perhaps not surprisingly, Arjuna 
wants to know what Krishna means by these terms and Krishna 
responds by giving brief definitions. The terms adhyatma, adhib-
huta, adhidaiva, and adhiyajña are derived from the Upanishads 
(see, for example, Chapter 4 of the Kena Upanishad) where the 
affix adhi means ‘in relation to’. So literally the four terms given 
here mean in relation to the self, in relation to the elements 
or living beings, in relation to the gods, and in relation to the 
Vedic ritual. 
We can list the definitions given by Krishna as follows:
Brahman
The word is defined simply by the term akshara, which can refer 
either to the sacred syllable om or to ‘that which does not decay’. 
We will encounter the division between kshara, that which decays, 
and akshara later on in relation to body and soul. But here Brah-
man can be defined either as om or as the non-material principle 
that does not decay.
Adhyatma
This is defined as svabhava, the inherent nature with which one 
is born and which is shaped by previous acts.

--- PAGE 137 ---
Chapter 8
129
Karma
The definition given here is interesting. Karma is the creative 
force that gives rise to the existence of a living being. In other 
words, we are now creating our future existence through the 
actions we are performing. I once heard a Christian ask a Bud-
dhist monk about who created the world if there was no God. To 
this the Buddhist replied that we ourselves are our own creators 
through the past actions we have performed. It seems that here 
the Gita is making precisely the same point.
Adhibhuta
This is defined as the kshara bhava, the form of existence that decays. 
This of course stands in contrast to the term akshara used to define 
Brahman and one must presume that it refers to the material embod-
iment contrasted with the atman within, which is Brahman.
Adhidaivata
Here the adhidaiva is defined as the purusha, a term used in Sam-
khya to refer to the soul within the body, a synonym for atman. 
This again is in contrast to the adhibhuta, which is the temporary 
identity based on the material body.
Adhiyajña
Somewhat surprisingly, Krishna claims that the adhiyajña is himself. 
This assertion may be connected with the idea presented in the last 
verse of Chapter 5 in which Krishna stated that he is to be regarded 
as the true recipient of the offerings made in the Vedic yajña.
Up until this point, however, the crucial question that Arjuna 
raises is yet to be answered. How can Krishna be known at the 
time of death? This question is answered in far greater detail in 
the verses that follow.
Verses 5–16: Fixing the mind on Krishna
5.	
And one who leaves the body at the time of death 
whilst focusing the mind on me alone attains my exis-
tence. There is no doubt about that.

--- PAGE 138 ---
Bhagavad-gita
130
6.	
Whatever the state of being a man’s mind is fixed 
upon at the time of death as he leaves his body is 
the state he then attains, Kaunteya, for a person 
develops into the type of existence he constantly 
dwells upon.
7.	
At all times therefore you should concentrate upon 
me and engage in battle. If your mind and intellect 
are fixed on me, you will be free from doubt and then 
you will come to me.
8.	
It is through the consciousness being absorbed with-
out deviation in the disciplined practice of yoga that a 
man goes to the Supreme Divine Being upon whom 
his thoughts are fixed. 
9.	
One should thus fix the mind upon the one who is 
the ancient seer, the controller who is smaller than the 
smallest thing, the ordainer of all that comes to pass, 
whose form is inconceivable, who is dazzling like the 
sun, and who is beyond all darkness.
10.	 At the time of death a person should absorb himself 
in devotion (bhakti) with an unwavering mind, using 
the power of yoga practice. Placing the life breath 
between the eyebrows in the proper way, he thereby 
attains that original Supreme Person. 
11.	
I shall now briefly explain to you that akshara (unde-
caying) principle, which those who know the Vedas 
expound upon and which sages who are devoid of 
passion enter into. It is due to their desire for this 
position that they take vows of celibacy.
12.	
Sealing all the entrances of the body, fixing the mind 
upon the heart and keeping the life breath (prana) 
within the head, a person should remain steadfast in 
yoga concentration.
13.	
One who gives up his body and departs this world 
whilst reciting ‘Om’, the single syllable that is 
Brahman, and fixing his mind on me attains the 
highest destination.

--- PAGE 139 ---
Chapter 8
131
14.	
For a person who always sets his mind on me and 
never allows his concentration to wander, a yogin con-
stant in his practice, I am very easy to attain, Partha.
15.	
Each rebirth is miserable and temporary but after 
attaining me the mahatmas never take birth again, 
having achieved the highest state of perfection.
16.	
Repeated birth occurs in all the worlds right up to 
Brahmaloka, Arjuna. But after attaining me, Kaunteya, 
there is no more rebirth.
This passage provides a clear link between the dhyana-yoga 
teachings of the sixth chapter and the emphasis on bhakti we 
encountered in Chapter 7 and further emphasises the identity 
the Gita reveals between the inner self and the Supreme Deity. 
And it is interesting to note how Krishna starts off by referring 
to himself as the Deity and then speaks of the Supreme Being 
in the third person; there seems little doubt, however, that they 
are one and the same. 
‘How are you to be known at the time of death?’
This is really the main theme of this passage. In verses 5 and 
6, Krishna asserts that those who are able to fix their minds on 
him at the time of death will attain him because the state of 
consciousness at the time of death dictates the nature of the form 
of existence into which the departing soul transmigrates. But 
how is this to be achieved? Essentially, Krishna teaches that one 
must condition oneself to fix the mind upon him at all times; 
if one can do that, then the mind will naturally revert to this 
condition at the time of death. And this fixing of the mind on 
Krishna is achieved by the yoga process referred to here, which 
is similar but not identical to the technique revealed in Chapter 
6. The practice referred to here consists of fixing the mind on 
one point in the region of the heart where the atman is located, 
moving the air of life to the top of the head and vibrating the 
mantra ‘om’ as one leaves the body. So the answer to Arjuna’s 
question is that one must condition the mind by yoga techniques, 
and then apply those techniques as one gives up one’s life.

--- PAGE 140 ---
Bhagavad-gita
132
Is this passage about yoga practice or about bhakti – 
devotion to the Supreme Deity?
The answer to this question is that it is about both, and here in 
Chapter 8, we find that dhyana-yoga and bhakti are integrated into 
one spiritual path. This is particularly apparent in verse 10 where 
the word bhakti is used in close association with a discussion of 
yoga techniques – bhaktya yukto yoga-balena chaiva, which means 
‘by means of devotion (bhakti) and the power of yoga (yoga-bala) as 
well’. It is also significant to note how the Deity is again identified 
as the atman within, a teaching that is particularly emphasised 
in the Katha Upanishad. Hence meditation on the inner self is 
equivalent to always thinking of Krishna, and so dhyana-yoga is 
in effect a manifestation of bhakti.
Yoga techniques at the time of death
Verses 12 and 13 form part of Krishna’s answer to Arjuna’s ques-
tion about how one can think of him at the time of death. Here, 
we have an addition to the yoga teachings of Chapter 6 with more 
emphasis on bodily exercises and not just mental concentration. 
We noted that Chapter 6 did not refer to pranayama, the regulation 
of the breath, but here this is the main focus. The apertures of 
the body are to be blocked by physical exercises, and the prana 
is then to be raised to the point known as the brahma-randhra, 
which is located at the top of the skull where the three fissures 
meet. Here also we find reference to the use of mantra as a part 
of the yoga techniques and in particular the recitation of the 
sacred syllable om, which in the Upanishads is identified as being 
non-different from Brahman.
What instruction is given in verses 15 and 16?
Firstly, verse 15 confirms the Vedantic view of the world as pri-
marily a place of suffering from which one should seek liberation 
or moksha. The terms used here are duhkhalaya and a-shashvata, 
beset with suffering and temporary by nature. Every living being 
in this world must undergo the process of rebirth, even the gods 
above, but if one can reach Krishna then the process of rebirth 

--- PAGE 141 ---
Chapter 8
133
is stopped. The phrase used here to define moksha is mam upetya, 
reaching me. Now this could mean attaining Vaikuntha, the 
heavenly domain of Vishnu, or it could mean the merging of 
the atman with Brahman in line with the ideas presented in the 
Upanishads. Liberation is the ending of the process of rebirth, 
but the actual state of being attained is not precisely explained – 
perhaps because it is beyond the reach of the human mind.
Verses 17–22: The material and 
the spiritual domain
17.	
Those persons who understand his day and his night 
recognise the limit of Brahma’s day as one thousand 
yugas (ages) and they understand his night as also last-
ing for a thousand yugas.
18.	 When the day commences all beings emerge from the 
avyakta (the non-manifest state of matter) and thereby 
become manifest. When the night comes, they merge 
once more into that which is designated as the avyakta.
19.	
Coming into being time and again, this host of living 
beings is helplessly merged back once more when 
the night comes. And at the coming of the day they 
appear again.
20.	 Beyond that avyakta, however, there is another avyakta 
(non-manifest) existence, which is eternal. When all 
living beings are destroyed that avyakta principle is 
not destroyed.
21.	 This avyakta is referred to as the akshara, non-decaying. 
They say it is the ultimate goal for on reaching this 
position one does not return. It is my supreme abode.
22.	 That Supreme Being (purusha), Partha, is attained by 
undivided devotion. The living beings are situated 
within him and he pervades this entire world.
I mentioned above that Arjuna’s questions at the start of the 
chapter seemed to draw the Bhagavad-gita away from the theme 
it had been pursuing concerning the nature of God and devotion 
to God. In particular, the question about how one can fix one’s 

--- PAGE 142 ---
Bhagavad-gita
134
mind on Krishna at the time of death has led to an extensive 
detour and something of a return to the type of yoga teachings 
considered in Chapter 6. In this passage the diversion continues 
as Krishna expands upon the statements made about moksha in 
verse 16. There it was asserted that rebirth occurs in every part 
of this world but if one can attain Krishna’s domain then rebirth 
will end. Now this notion of two distinct realms of existence is 
explained further. We may note the following points.
Verses 17–19 provide more information about the domain 
of rebirth and here some elements of cosmology are presented, 
including reference to the duration of the creation. Indian cos-
mology reveals that the world is constantly manifested and then 
withdrawn, an eternally repeated process of creation and destruc-
tion. Here each period of manifestation is designated as a day of 
Brahma and the period of non-manifestation is Brahma’s night. 
Each creation lasts for a period of one thousand yugas. Elsewhere 
in the Mahabharata and in the Puranas, this idea is explained in 
more detail. There we learn that there are four ages or yugas: 
Satya-yuga, Treta-yuga, Dvapara-yuga and the present age known 
as Kali-yuga. Each of these yugas has different qualities and each 
lasts for thousands of years. Here one must presume that when 
it is stated that each creation lasts for a thousand yugas, it means 
a thousand cycles of the four yugas.
At the beginning of a creation, when the daytime of Brahma 
begins, the living beings transmigrating under the control of 
past karma emerge from a non-manifest state and resume their 
activities once more. And when the creation ends after a thou-
sand yugas have passed, they return once more into a condition 
of stasis or non-manifestation.
The next three verses, 20–22, turn to consider the second 
of the two domains, that in which rebirth does not take place, 
referred to by Krishna in verse 16 when he mentioned liberation 
as reaching himself. Like this world during the night of Brahma, 
that state of being is also non-manifest because it cannot be 
perceived from a position in this domain. It is not subject to 
repeated creation and destruction as this world is. This domain 

--- PAGE 143 ---
Chapter 8
135
is akshara, it does not decay, and it is the domain of Krishna, his 
dhama, in line with the statement of verse 16.
Verse 22 presents an interesting perspective because here the 
higher domain in which there is no rebirth is referred to as 
the Supreme Person himself. Hence we must understand that 
Krishna’s abode is not the place where Krishna resides, but is 
Krishna himself; the Supreme Being and his abode are one and 
the same.
Verses 23–28: Times for leaving the body
23.	
Now I shall speak of the time of departing in which 
the yogins do not return to this world and the time in 
which they do return, O best of the Bharatas.
24.	 Persons who have knowledge of Brahman (or the 
Vedas) and who depart during the fire, the light, the 
day, the bright half of the moon, or the six months 
when the sun is in the northern transit go to Brahman.
25.	
But a yogin who departs during the smoke, the night, 
the dark fortnight of the moon or the six months 
when the sun is in its southern transit come back to 
this world after entering the light of the moon.
26.	 Thus it is understood that there are these two paths 
from this world, the light and the dark, which exist 
eternally. By following one there is no return, but by 
following the other one comes back once more.
27.	
By understanding these two paths, Partha, the yogin is 
never bewildered. So engage yourself in the practice 
of yoga at all times, Arjuna.
28.	 A specific reward is ordained as the fruit of the 
merit (punya) acquired through study of the Vedas, 
sacrifice (yajña), religious austerity (tapa) or acts of 
charity, but by fully understanding this wisdom the 
yogin goes beyond this world and attains the supreme, 
original position.
Here the topic raised by Arjuna is pursued still further as Krishna 
turns to consider an idea that is to be found in the Chandogya 

--- PAGE 144 ---
Bhagavad-gita
136
Upanishad (5.10.1–6) and the Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad (6.2.15). 
Two different paths are described for the departure of the soul, 
one of which leads to the domain in which there is no rebirth 
whilst the other leads to a continuation of the cycle. The Gita here 
summarises these verses and puts a slightly different interpretation 
on them, suggesting that the time at which one departs from 
the body is significant in terms of the destination one achieves. 
The Upanishadic version is not quite the same as it refers to the 
path taken rather than the time of death. This is why the words 
‘departs during the fire’ (v. 24) and ‘departs during the smoke’ (v. 
25) seem a little odd here. It is because they are quotations from 
the Upanishads placed into a rather different context. The inter-
esting point to note is that here the Gita is providing something 
of a commentary on the works of the shruti, or Veda, as they are 
relevant to the topic it is presently dealing with. But why does 
the Gita include this passage? Why does Krishna feel the need 
to refer to the ideas of the Upanishads?
Clearly, the passage from the Upanishads is regarded as being 
relevant to the main topic covered in Chapter 8, which is all about 
the two alternative destinations one can achieve at the time of 
death: the domain of rebirth and the domain from which one 
does not come back. This is what Krishna has just considered 
in verses 17–22, and so it is appropriate that some consideration 
should be given to Vedic ideas on this topic.
It is interesting to note the times which are regarded as aus-
picious and inauspicious here. The auspicious times are listed as 
the daytime, the bright fortnight of the lunar month, and the 
six months beginning from the festival of Makara Sankranti 
(Pongal in Tamil Nadu). These months are known as uttarayana 
and are still regarded by Hindus as being more auspicious. The 
inauspicious times are the night time, the dark fortnight of the 
lunar month and the six months of the year when the sun trav-
els on its dakshinayana or southern path. But what is the point 
Krishna is making here?
We might suggest that the key to the passage is to be found 
in verse 27, which refers to the yogin, presumably one who has 

--- PAGE 145 ---
Chapter 8
137
adhered to the teachings given in verses 8–16. I think what 
Krishna is saying here is that if one is successful in the yogic 
endeavour he has outlined, and is able to fix the mind on him 
at the time of death, then the rules presented in the Veda do 
not apply. He attains the domain from which there is no return 
regardless of any other circumstances. I would thus interpret 
the words ‘the yogin is never bewildered’ (v. 27) as meaning ‘the 
yogin is not troubled by these rules about the time for leaving the 
body’ because he has entirely transcended the Vedic strictures 
by means of his spiritual perfection. This view would seem to 
be confirmed in verse 28, where it is shown that the yogin who 
adheres to the instructions Krishna has given gains all the rewards 
obtained through other forms of religion. Hence the rules of that 
religion cannot constrain him.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 8
As stated above, the eighth chapter of the Bhagavad-gita appears 
to be something of a digression from the main theme of this 
middle section of the text, a digression provoked by the last 
of Arjuna’s questions in verse 2 about how one can think of 
Krishna at the time of death. Krishna’s reply is that at the 
time of death, the mind will remain fixed on whatever it has 
been accustomed to dwell on during one’s lifetime. There-
fore, one should practice a form of yoga that trains the mind 
to become fixed upon the Supreme Deity who exists within 
one’s own being. One should employ yogic techniques such as 
pranayama and the recitation of the sacred mantra ‘om’ in order 
to achieve this goal of concentrating on Krishna at the very 
moment of death. The Gita then explains that there are two 
domains of existence that we can dwell in. One is the domain 
of rebirth where there is repeated creation and annihilation, 
and the other is the domain of the Deity. And if we can reach 
that sphere of existence, then rebirth is ended and liberation 
is achieved. Finally, Krishna reflects upon the teachings of 
the Upanishads on this subject, which appear to suggest that 
if one departs from the body at different times of the day, the 

--- PAGE 146 ---
Bhagavad-gita
138
month and the year, one will achieve one or the other of the 
two domains. Krishna’s point here seems to be that one who 
achieves success in the yoga practice he has recommended 
need not be concerned or bewildered by these injunctions, for 
the yogin has achieved the absolute success that transcends all 
other considerations.

--- PAGE 147 ---

139
Chapter 9 
W
ith the discourse of Chapter 8 completed, Krishna now 
returns to the theme he was pursuing in the seventh 
chapter, namely that of the nature of God and spiritual 
practices based on that knowledge – the way of bhakti, the bhak-
ti-marga. In many ways the ninth chapter is the very heart of 
Krishna’s discussion of the nature of God, of his own identity 
and of the ways of worshipping God. And here we will find the 
ideas first presented in Chapter 7 revisited and expanded upon.
Verses 1–3: The introduction to the chapter
1.	
But now, O non-envious one, I will reveal to you this 
greatest of mysteries, including both the jñana and the 
vijñana. When this is understood you will be liberated 
from evil.
2.	
This teaching is the king of knowledge, the king of 
mysteries. This is the purest of all things. It can be 
realised by direct perception, it is based on dharma, it 
is very easy to perform and it is unfading. 
3.	
Persons who have no faith in this dharma do not 
attain Me, Paramtapa. They return to the path of 
death and rebirth.
These first three verses form an introduction to the teachings that 
follow in which Krishna emphasises the high status of the ideas he 
will now reveal. He refers to this teaching as raja-vidya, the king of 
knowledge, a phrase which probably means that this is the highest 
knowledge presented in the Gita. Persons who do not gain an 
understanding of this dharma that is based on bhakti will return to 

--- PAGE 148 ---
Bhagavad-gita
140
the ‘path of death and rebirth’, the implication being that as well 
as revealing the nature of God this teaching is a revelation of the 
path to moksha. And just as in Chapter 7, we find the teaching 
defined in terms of jñana and vijñana, and again I would suggest 
that this probably refers to theoretical knowledge about the nature 
of God and then to knowledge of religious practice.
Verses 4–10: God and the world
4.	
This whole world is pervaded by me in my non-man-
ifest form. All beings are situated in me but I am not 
present in them.
5.	
And yet the living beings are not situated in me; you 
should see this as my magical opulence. My own self 
is what causes living beings to exist; it sustains the 
living beings but is not situated within them.
6.	
The great wind, constantly moving through all places, 
is situated in space. You should understand that it is in 
this sense that all living beings are situated in me.
7.	
At the end of the period of creation (kalpa), Kaunteya, 
all beings enter into my prakriti, and at the beginning 
of a kalpa, I manifest them again.
8.	
Making use of this prakriti of mine, I repeatedly create 
this entire host of living beings. They are helpless for 
they are under the control of prakriti.
9.	
And these actions do not bind me, Dhanamjaya. It 
is as if I am situated in a position of neutrality, unat-
tached to these actions.
10.	
It is through me alone that prakriti brings the moving 
and non-moving beings into existence, for I am the 
Controller. This is the reason why the world proceeds 
on its course.
This is a rather difficult passage in which the Bhagavad-gita 
continues to speak about the nature of the Deity it is extolling 
and in particular the relationship between God and the world 
he creates. In seeking to understand these verses, we might try 
to find answers to the following questions.

--- PAGE 149 ---
Chapter 9 
141
Is there a contradiction between verses 4 and 5?  
Is there a solution to this paradox?
The obvious contradiction here is that in verse 4, Krishna says, 
‘All beings are situated in me’ and then in verse 5, he says, ‘The 
living beings are not situated in me.’ The Gita is well aware of 
the paradox as Krishna then says, ‘This is my magical opulence.’ 
In other words, what would be a contradiction or logical impos-
sibility in the context of the material domain is possible in the 
higher domain where God resides.
The relationship between God and the living beings
This is a difficult passage, but I think what is being said here 
is that the created world and the living beings are within the 
existence of God. As we saw in Chapter 7, he is not a remote 
purely transcendent Deity, but rather he shares the identity of 
the Upanishadic Brahman and pervades the whole world by his 
divine presence. Here I think we are getting an early hint of the 
vishva-rupa revealed in Chapter 11 through which Krishna shows 
that this existence is his bodily form. And the contradiction or 
paradox might be explained again by the asymmetrical identity 
between God and the world. The world and the living beings are 
nothing but God; they are entirely dependent upon God. Yet it 
would be wrong to turn the equation around and say that God 
is nothing but the totality of the world and the living beings; he 
is all of that, but this is not the limit of his identity. The met-
aphor of the wind in space reinforces the point. Wind cannot 
exist without space to move through; it is wholly dependent on 
space for its existence. Yet space can exist with or without wind 
blowing through it. In the same way the living beings are wholly 
dependent on God for their existence, but God is not dependent 
on the living beings. There is identity between them, but it is 
not symmetrical or absolute identity.
The relationship between God and prakriti
The word prakriti is used in Samkhya philosophy and elsewhere 
to designate matter in its basic undifferentiated state. Hence, we 

--- PAGE 150 ---
Bhagavad-gita
142
might translate prakriti as ‘the material substance’, and it is from 
out of prakriti that the varieties of material manifestation evolve. 
It is important to note that in Samkhya thought, unlike Advaita 
Vedanta, the material manifestations are real, though temporary. 
In verse 4 of Chapter 7, Krishna defined prakriti in terms of eight 
elements and listed those eight. He also claimed that he is the 
possessor of prakriti and in these verses it is revealed that prakriti 
is a tool owned and used by God in order to create the world 
inhabited by living beings. He is the ultimate creator of the 
world, the source from which it emerges, but he makes use of 
prakriti in order to enact this process. Here we might conclude 
that the Bhagavad-gita is offering us a form of theistic Samkhya 
that stands in contrast to the atheistic or non-theistic Samkhya 
encountered elsewhere.
‘I am the controller’ 
In verse 9, we have a slight return to the ideas on action and 
reaction that loomed so large in the earlier chapters of the Gita. 
In 3.22–24 and 4.14, we saw Krishna refer to himself as a kar-
ma-yogin who performs action but is not under the control of the 
law of karma. The same point is made here. He is active in the 
process of creation, but one should not therefore think that he 
is under the control of the laws of action and reaction that act 
upon other living beings.
The conclusion given in verse 10 is really quite a simple one. 
The world of matter with all the varieties of living being is man-
ifested by means of prakriti, but we should not think that prakriti 
is the ultimate source of the world as claimed in the classical 
Samkhya philosophy. It is the Deity who controls prakriti and is 
the ultimate creator of the world; prakriti is just the tool he uses 
for creation.
Verses 11–15: Worship of Krishna
11.	
Fools despise me when I accept this human form. 
They do not understand my higher nature as the 
Supreme Lord of the living beings.

--- PAGE 151 ---
Chapter 9 
143
12.	 The hopes, deeds, and understanding of these unintel-
ligent persons are futile. Falling prey to delusion they 
adopt the nature of asuras and rakshasas.
13.	
But the mahatmas inherit the divine nature, Partha. 
Understanding that I am the unchanging source of all 
beings, they worship me with undeviating minds.
14.	
Constantly singing my praises, engaging in resolute 
vows and bowing before me with devotion, they are 
always engaged in acts of worship.
15.	 There are others who make their offerings through 
the jñana-yajña, the sacrifice of knowledge, and 
who worship me as that which is one and yet still 
exists in many different forms, with faces turned in 
every direction.
I have suggested previously that the jñana and the vijñana referred 
to at the start of Chapter 7 and Chapter 9 refer to theoretical 
and practical knowledge. If that suggestion is accepted, then we 
might say that verses 4–10 are jñana in the sense of providing a 
theological explanation of the presence of God within the crea-
tion, and that now we are moving on to the vijñana in the form 
of worship of the Deity thus defined. Let us note the following 
points here.
Verses 11 and 12 are about worshipping God but only in a 
negative sense as in verse 15 of Chapter 7. We see the same pat-
tern here. First, the types of person who do not worship Krishna 
are described, and only then do we learn about the worshippers 
and the acts of worship. 
Here I would again suggest that we look at the Mahabharata 
context. The fools referred to here do not accept Krishna’s status 
as a divine avatar, and they adopt the nature of demonic beings, 
asuras and rakshasas. It is well known that Duryodhana and his 
close associates refused to accept Krishna as a divine being. Even 
when he displayed an aspect of his vishva-rupa before them, they 
regarded it as a manifestation of magical ability rather than of 
divinity. And we are informed on several occasions in the Mahab-
harata that the reason for Vishnu’s appearance as Krishna was the 

--- PAGE 152 ---
Bhagavad-gita
144
fact that asuras and rakshasas had taken birth in the royal families 
on earth. Hence there does seem to be a reference to the Mahab-
harata narrative in these two verses.
The devotees are here referred to by the term mahatma, liter-
ally ‘great soul’. They have acquired the knowledge, the jñana 
revealed by Krishna in the previous verses, and understand that 
he is the bhutadi, the source of the living beings. And because they 
possess this jñana they therefore adopt the vijñana, the religious 
practices by which the Supreme Deity is worshipped and adored.
Verses 14 and 15 are interesting because they seem to suggest 
that there are two ways by which an enlightened person may 
worship the Deity. In verse 14, the usual practices associated with 
bhakti are mentioned. These include kirtan, singing the praises of 
the Deity, accepting regulated vows and bowing down before 
the Lord. But in verse 15 it is said that others worship Krishna 
by means of the jñana-yajña that seeks to establish and realise the 
all-pervasive aspect of God. So in this sense the Bhagavad-gita 
is non-dogmatic; it accepts that there are two ways in which 
devotion can be expressed, one through overt acts of worship 
and the other by the acquisition of higher knowledge. We have 
had suggestions of these two paths earlier on at the beginning 
of Chapter 3 and again at the start of Chapter 5, and the topic 
will be revisited later on in Chapter 12 where Arjuna raises a 
specific question about these two approaches.
Verses 16–19: The immanence of Krishna
16.	
I am the ritual, I am the sacrifice, I am the offering 
made to the ancestors and I am the herbs. I am the 
mantra, I am the ghee, I am the sacred fire and I am 
the offering made into the fire.
17.	
I am the father of this world, the mother, the ordainer 
and the grandfather. I am the object of knowledge, I 
am the purifier, I am the syllable om, and I am the Rik, 
the Sama and the Yajus.
18.	
I am the goal, the sustainer, the lord, the witness, 
the abode, the refuge and the friend. I am creation, 

--- PAGE 153 ---
Chapter 9 
145
destruction, and the foundation, I am the treasury and 
I am the imperishable seed.
19.	
I bring forth warmth, I hold back the rain and I then 
release it. I am immortality and I am death. I am both 
being and non-being, Arjuna.
These four verses seem to be returning to the discussion of verses 
4–10, which gave instruction about the connection between 
the Deity and the world he creates. Here, however, I think we 
should take these verses as an expansion upon the second form 
of devotion spoken about in verse 15 relating to the acquisition 
of realised knowledge. We may note the following points:
In verse 16, Krishna identifies himself as the different aspects 
of the Vedic yajña and here we might look back to Chapter 4 
(v. 24) where elements of the yajña were identified as Brahman. 
Here I think we have an expansion on the idea of the jñana-ya-
jña mentioned in verse 15. Krishna is represented as being all 
the various aspects of the metaphorical ritual referred to as the 
‘sacrifice of knowledge’, which aims at the realisation of the 
presence of God in all things.
Verse 17 proclaims again Krishna’s position as the controller 
and original source of the world but here we should note that 
he also refers to himself as vedyam, the subject realised by higher 
knowledge, and as omkara, the sacred syllable identified by the 
Upanishads as being non-different from Brahman. So again it is 
explained how the realised knowledge that Krishna referred to 
earlier is in fact a way of worshipping and of realising Krishna 
himself.
Verses 18 and 19 emphasise the immanence of Krishna within 
this world in a manner that reminds us of the metaphor of the 
jewels on a thread given in Chapter 7 (v. 7). It is his presence 
within the world that allows the order of the cosmos to prevail, 
and the goal of the jñana-yajña, the sacrifice based on knowledge, 
is to realise that presence, which is usually avyakta or invisi-
ble. Here we might look back to verse 4 of the present chapter 
in which Krishna started his discourse by stating that he per-
vades the entire world in an invisible or non-manifest form, an 

--- PAGE 154 ---
Bhagavad-gita
146
avyakta-murti. He cannot be seen but his presence in this world 
is the fundamental principle that sustains the cosmic order as is 
emphasised in these two verses. The goal of the jñana-yajña is to 
achieve knowledge of this imperceptible presence, and if we look 
ahead to the awesome vision of Chapter 11 we might see this as 
being the avyakta-murti becoming vyakta, the invisible presence 
becoming visible with terrifying consequences for Arjuna.
Verses 20–25: Worship of the gods 
and worship of Krishna
20.	 Drinking Soma, purged of sin (papa), those who 
follow the three Vedas seek the heavenly destination 
by worshipping me with yajñas. By this means they 
attain the pure domain presided over by the lord 
of the gods and in that heaven they experience the 
celestial pleasures enjoyed by the gods.
21.	
But after enjoying the delights of that extensive heav-
enly domain, they must re-enter the mortal world 
when their stock of piety (punya) is exhausted. So by 
adhering to the dharma of the three Vedas persons 
who seek to fulfil their desires merely go there and 
then again come back.
22.	 But then there are persons who worship me with 
undeviating concentration. For those who engage 
constantly in this way I bring both prosperity 
and security.
23.	 Those who are devoted to other gods and worship 
them with faith actually worship me alone, Kaunteya, 
but not in the manner that is properly ordained.
24.	 It is I alone who am the enjoyer and also the master 
of all yajñas. Such persons do not know me as such 
and so fall down from the position they attain.
25.	
Devotees of the gods go to the gods, devotees of the 
ancestors go to the ancestors, those who worship 
spirits go to the spirits but those who worship me 
go to me.

--- PAGE 155 ---
Chapter 9 
147
I mentioned earlier that in this ninth chapter, Krishna seems to 
return to his main line of discourse that was interrupted some-
what by Arjuna’s questions at the start of Chapter 8. And now 
that he has returned to his principal theme we find that several 
of the same topics are being touched upon, including the differ-
ence between veneration of the Vedic gods and the devotion to 
Krishna that is being discussed here. 
Are there any differences between this passage and the 
parallel passage in Chapter 7 (vv. 20–23)?
In Chapter 7, Krishna revealed that the inspiration that leads 
people to worship the gods comes from himself within their 
hearts, as this manner of worship corresponds with their inner 
nature. And Krishna also pointed out there that the reward 
gained by such worship is in fact bestowed by himself alone rather 
than the deity who appears to grant boons. These points are not 
referred to here. In this passage, there is a greater emphasis on the 
fact that the worship of the gods is performed by means of the 
Vedic yajña, and both chapters emphasise the fact that the rewards 
gained by this worship are limited and temporary. Both passages 
also point out that the worshippers of the gods are elevated to the 
domain of the gods whilst those who worship Krishna attain the 
domain of Krishna. And both emphasise the fact that worship of 
the gods is not the highest form of spirituality. In Chapter 7, the 
worshippers were referred to as being of limited intelligence and 
devoid of knowledge, whilst here that worship is described as 
a-vidhi-purvakam, meaning ‘not done in the proper manner’. The 
main point of both passages is to stress the fact that the worship 
of the Vedic gods prescribed in the karma-kanda portion of the 
Veda is different from the way of bhakti Krishna is recommending 
here, which clearly falls under the heading of moksha dharma. 
Externally, it may appear to be that the ritual worship of 
the Vedic gods is the same as the worship of Krishna, but the 
reward gained by such worship is material and temporary whilst 
worship of Krishna leads to the eternal domain and liberation 
from rebirth.

--- PAGE 156 ---
Bhagavad-gita
148
Who is actually worshipped through the vedic yajña?
One of the points Krishna makes here is that he himself is 
the true object of worship and the recipient of the offerings 
made into the sacred fire. This point was established at the 
end of Chapter 5, where Krishna referred to himself bhoktaram 
yajña-tapasam, the true object of yajña and of acts of austerity. 
The same point is made here, but it is shown that the wor-
shippers being described do not understand this point and 
think they are worshipping the gods named in the hymns of 
the Rigveda. This point is made clear in verse 24. Krishna is 
indeed the true object of worship in Vedic ritual, but because 
the enactors of the ritual do not understand this they do not 
gain the full reward of devotion to Krishna, which will now 
be discussed.
Verses 26–34: Worship of Krishna 
– The way of bhakti
26.	 When it is presented in a mood of devotion, I will 
accept the devotional offering of a leaf, a flower, a 
fruit or water from one who is pure at heart.
27.	
Make whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever 
you sacrifice, whatever charity you give, and what-
ever austerities you undertake into an offering to Me, 
Kaunteya.
28.	 It is in this way that you will be liberated from both 
the good and evil results, which are the bonds of 
action. By engaging yourself in this yoga of renun-
ciation, you will become liberated and you will 
come to me.
29.	 I am equal towards all living beings; no one is 
hated by me and no one is beloved. Those who 
worship me with devotion, however, are in me and 
I am in them.
30.	
Even if a person who thus worships me as his only 
object performs the most wicked deeds, still he is to 
be considered a sadhu for his resolution is correct.

--- PAGE 157 ---
Chapter 9 
149
31.	
He quickly becomes a dharmatma, committed to 
dharma, and attains enduring peace. Make it known, 
Kaunteya, that my devotee does not perish.
32.	
Having sought shelter with me, Partha, even those of 
evil births, as well as women, vaisyas, and shudras, go to 
the highest destination.
33.	
How much more so then in the case of righteous 
brahmins, and those religious kings (raja-rishis) who 
show devotion. So having reached this temporary 
world that is devoid of happiness, you should engage 
in worshipping me.
34.	
Fix your mind on me, become my devotee, worship 
me and bow down to me. By engaging yourself in 
such acts and dedicating yourself to me, you will 
surely come to me.
It is in this passage and the opening verses of Chapter 10 that 
Krishna’s discourse on devotion to the Supreme Deity reaches 
its ultimate conclusion, although he has more to say on the 
subject later on. Here the teaching is completely focussed on 
ways of worshipping Krishna and the result gained by this type 
of religious practice. There is nothing of this kind to be found 
in any of the major Upanishads, and it is the emphasis placed 
on the idea of a personal God and loving devotion to that God 
that marks the Gita out as being such an important text in the 
development of Hindu religious thought. 
Devotional practice 
It is not stated overtly, but one might reasonably presume that 
verse 26 is referring to murti-puja, the worship of sacred images as 
performed within the Hindu mandir, or temple. This is implied 
because it is hard to imagine any other setting in which offerings 
of the type mentioned here could be made to Krishna. If this 
is accepted as advocating murti-puja, it is significant because it 
is probably the earliest reference we have in Hindu scripture to 
this type of religious practice, which does not form any part of 
the ritual of the Veda.

--- PAGE 158 ---
Bhagavad-gita
150
How is bhakti connected to  
the earlier teaching on karma-yoga?
This is an interesting point. When Krishna was teaching the doc-
trines of karma-yoga in the earlier chapters of the Gita, he made 
little reference to himself as the Deity. The idea of karma-yoga is 
simply that one performs one’s duty in a mood of renunciation 
without any desire to enjoy the results of action. In verses 27 and 
28, however, we see that desireless action is transformed into 
action done as an offering to Krishna. As in the earlier teachings, 
it is asserted that action of this type will not lead to any future 
karma, and so the process of rebirth can be ended. However, it 
is interesting to note how the earlier teaching on karma-yoga has 
now become integrated into the prevailing idea of devotion to 
the Supreme Deity.
Is Krishna equal to all living beings?
Krishna certainly states very clearly that he is equal to all living 
beings – samo ‘ham sarva-bhuteshu – but there does seem to be an 
exception made in this verse (v. 29). Here, the word tu plays a 
very important role for it means ‘but’ or ‘however’ and, in this 
context, suggests an exception to the rule established in the first 
line. That rule is that Krishna is equal to all, ‘but’ this rule does 
not apply to those who worship him in a mood of devotion. 
The clear implication is that Krishna is partial to his devotees 
and as revealed later on, this partiality is an expression of his 
love for them.
Continued sinful activities while on the path of bhakti 
Verse 30 seems to suggest that the way of bhakti enables a person to 
continue with sinful activities and still attain the highest spiritual 
goals, but I think we need to look more carefully. In verse 31, 
the situation becomes a little clearer because here it is asserted 
that the wrongdoer who takes to the worship of Krishna quickly 
ceases from his previous mode of conduct and instead becomes 
a dharmatma, a person dedicated to dharma. The idea seems to 
be that any person who engages in worship of the Deity will be 

--- PAGE 159 ---
Chapter 9 
151
transformed by this action and will therefore cease to behave in 
an unrighteous manner. The verses certainly do not give license 
for immoral behaviour whilst one is engaged in acts of devotion.
The wording of verse 32
Verse 32 is rather controversial, and even the precise translation 
of the words is open to debate. In fact, the thrust of what Krishna 
is saying here is liberal in intent, as it opens up the possibility of 
gaining the highest spiritual goals to any person, regardless of 
caste or gender. Hence the teaching here is that a sadhu or saint 
can be a man or woman from any background; the only criterion 
is devotion to Krishna. The problem arises, however, over the 
term papa-yonayah, which means those of sinful birth. I have 
translated the verse here as if papa-yonis, women, vaishyas, and 
shudras were four items in a single list, but it could be understood 
that papa-yonayah, or sinful births, are being defined as women, 
vaishyas, shudras. In either case, it does raise serious questions 
about the Gita’s view of women and members of the lower castes 
though, as stated at the beginning, the primary intent behind 
the verse is probably to elevate rather than to degrade.
The goal achieved through devotion and worship
In verse 28, it is said that one who performs these acts of devo-
tion will be liberated (mokshyase) from the bondage of action and 
will then attain Krishna (mam upaishyasi). Verse 32 states that 
devotees of any background go to the highest destination (yanti 
param gatim), and verse 34 repeats the words of 28 in saying that 
devotees come to Krishna. The point is that the Bhagavad-gita 
is above all else a treatise on gaining liberation from rebirth, a 
moksha-shastra, and this emphasis is clearly perpetuated even where 
the main topic of the discourse is devotion to the Supreme Deity.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 9
We have now almost reached the end of Krishna’s main teachings 
about the nature of God and worship of God, though a dra-
matic twist to the topic is about to occur in response to further 

--- PAGE 160 ---
Bhagavad-gita
152
requests from Arjuna. These teachings are more or less concluded 
by verse 11 of Chapter 10 when Arjuna begins to seek further 
understanding; however, in Chapter 12, we encounter a further 
intensification of the idea of divine love and divine grace. In 
Chapter 9, following the introductory verses, we find a repetition 
of some of the main ideas introduced in Chapter 7 and an expan-
sion on the main themes of the discussion contained therein. We 
first encounter a discourse on the relationship between the Deity 
and the world we inhabit, which is his creation and is entirely 
under his control. The God of the Bhagavad-gita is certainly an 
omnipotent, transcendent, monotheistic Deity, but one of the 
main differences from Western monotheism is to be found in the 
idea of the immanence of God. Krishna is transcendent, but his 
invisible (avyakta) presence pervades the world, preserving the 
order and balance of creation. Foolish people do not understand 
Krishna’s divine identity, but there are great souls who do, and 
on the basis of this realisation they engage in acts of devotion 
either by praising and worshipping him or by pursuing realised 
knowledge of his identity as it pervades and controls the world. 
This worship is not the same as that which forms a part of the 
Vedic yajña. The Vedic ritual is performed without knowledge 
of the Supreme Deity and yields only temporary results, whilst 
worship of Krishna leads to liberation from rebirth. Therefore, 
Arjuna should worship Krishna with devotional offerings, and 
he should dedicate all his actions to Krishna. The Deity is by 
nature equal to all living beings, but he is particularly inclined 
towards those who become his devotees. Hence anyone who 
worships Krishna will attain the highest spiritual goal of lib-
eration, regardless of their birth, lifestyle, or background. The 
conclusion of the chapter is thus that Arjuna should absorb his 
mind in Krishna, be his devotee, and worship him.

--- PAGE 161 ---

153
Chapter 10
C
hapter 10 begins with a continuation of the ideas we 
have been exploring in Chapter 9, and verses 8–11 provide 
a useful summation of the main principles of doctrine 
relating to God and devotional practice. In verse 12, however, 
Arjuna begins to redirect the discussion, firstly by proclaiming 
his absolute acceptance of Krishna’s divinity and then by asking 
how one who exists in this world can conceive of Krishna. The 
answer to this question dominates the latter half of the chapter 
as Krishna gives a poetic account of how his presence can be 
recognised in the opulence and glory of the world. The point 
is made philosophically in the final verses of the chapter, which 
serve to explain the significance of what has been said before. 
The focus here is still on the nature of God and developing a 
mood of devotion to God, but Arjuna’s request leads the line of 
discussion to take a different form.
Verses 1–7: Krishna as the origin of the world
1.	
The Lord said: Listen again, O mighty one, to the 
excellent words I will speak to you. You take delight 
in such matters and I desire your welfare.
2.	
The gods cannot comprehend my origin and neither 
do the great rishis. Indeed it is I who am the only 
source of the gods and the great rishis.
3.	
One who knows me as unborn and without begin-
ning, as the great Lord of the worlds, is the one who 
is not deluded amongst mortal beings. He is liberated 
from all sins.

--- PAGE 162 ---
Bhagavad-gita
154
4.	
Intelligence, knowledge, freedom from illusion, toler-
ance, truthfulness, self-control, tranquillity, joy, misery, 
existence, non-existence, fear, fearlessness,
5.	
Not harming, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity, charity, 
fame, and infamy are the varied dispositions for living 
entities, which arise from me alone.
6.	
In the beginning the seven great rishis and the four 
Manus were endowed with my nature because they 
were born from my mind; all these living beings exist-
ing in the world are descended from them.
7.	
One who properly understands this glory and mystical 
power of mine is properly engaged through unwaver-
ing yoga discipline. There is no doubt about this.
Krishna opens this chapter by repeating that he is the source of 
this world, though here he does not mention his use of prakriti 
to achieve this. Everything is produced from the Supreme 
Deity who exists beyond this world; again, we have a clear 
statement of a monotheistic theology. Here, we might note 
the following points.
The rishis referred to in verse 2 are the seers who perceive 
the Vedas and then reveal them to the rest of humanity. But 
even they cannot comprehend Krishna for it is Krishna who 
first creates the rishis as we hear again in verse 6. And here also 
we see that Hindu monotheism is quite compatible with pol-
ytheism. There are different gods, but these gods are a part of 
this world. There is only one Supreme Deity who creates and 
controls these secondary gods, so in this way monotheism and 
polytheism are reconciled.
The various states of existence experienced by living beings 
in this world are all created by the Supreme Deity. These are the 
qualities individual possess as a result of their inherent nature, the 
svabhava derived from previous actions. Buddhists would suggest 
that this cycle of karma and rebirth is an automatic one and that 
it is one of the inevitable laws of the universe. Here, however, 
the Gita indicates that the process continues under the direction 
of Krishna who is the creator and controller of the world.

--- PAGE 163 ---
Chapter 10
155
According to accounts contained in the Mahabharata and the 
Puranas, the seven great rishis and the Manus mentioned in verse 6 
were the first living beings created at the beginning of the world. 
They then give rise to all the different creatures that inhabit this 
creation. The point here is that the primal cause of the world is 
Krishna, who is the creator of the creators.
Verses 3 and 7 once again refer to the necessity of under-
standing Krishna as the controller of the world, an idea we have 
encountered several times before. This knowledge frees a person 
from the effects of previous sinful actions and is the basis for 
religious practice referred to here as avikampa-yoga, yoga that is 
unwavering. The indication of the next verse is that here the 
word ‘yoga’ refers to acts of devotion performed to worship 
the Deity.
Verses 8–11: Worship of Krishna
8.	
I am the origin of all things; everything comes 
into being from out of me. Understanding this, 
the enlightened ones worship me, filled with 
loving attachment.
9.	
Their minds are absorbed in me and their lives are 
given over to me, they enlighten one another about 
me. Talking constantly about me, they find satisfac-
tion and delight.
10.	 To those who engage constantly in such practices, 
worshipping in a mood of love, I give that yoga of the 
intellect by means of which they come to me.
11.	
I am situated within their very being and out of com-
passion I destroy the darkness that arises from igno-
rance with the blazing torch of knowledge.
These four verses mark the end of this phase of the Bhagavad-gi-
ta’s discourse, and we now begin to move in a new direction, 
which culminates in the great revelation of Chapter 11. There is 
nothing that is particularly new here; nonetheless, these verses 
are remarkably dense and reassert a number of important points 
about the Gita’s understanding of God. 

--- PAGE 164 ---
Bhagavad-gita
156
What is the next step in spiritual progression after 
knowledge of God?
Iti matva bhajante mam. When one has knowledge of the Deity 
as the origin of the world, one then begins to worship him. 
The verb bhaj used here is the root of the word bhakti, meaning 
devotion. Again, we have the suggestion that jñana or realised 
knowledge is not the final stage in the progressive path but is 
the basis for devotion to God.
What devotional activities are referred to here?
In earlier chapters, the Bhagavad-gita referred to singing devo-
tional songs, bowing down with reverence and making offerings 
of different types. Here we are told that the devotees take pleasure 
in discussing the attributes and activities of the Deity. This reflects 
the idea referred to earlier in Chapter 4 (v. 9), and we might note 
that still today in India assemblies are held in which the stories 
about Krishna taken from the Bhagavata Purana are discussed. So 
we have a clear link here between the specific teachings of the 
Gita and contemporary Hindu practice.
Krishna’s response to the devotees’ worship
Here also, we encounter the idea of divine grace as the best means 
of attaining moksha, which was mentioned earlier in Chapter 7 (v. 
14). Liberation from rebirth can be attained by means of self-mas-
tery and control of the mind, as Chapter 6 reveals, but it can also be 
gained as a gift of grace granted by God. Christians often proclaim 
‘Jesus saves!’, and here we find Krishna expressing a similar idea in 
relation to those who are his devotees. The word used here, dadami, 
means ‘I give’, and it indicates very clearly that the Deity has the 
power to grant moksha to those he loves. The precise wording here 
is dadami buddhi-yogam tam, which means ‘I give that buddhi-yoga’, 
yena mam upayanti te, ‘through which they reach me’. It is hard to 
be definite here about the precise meaning of buddhi-yoga, although 
earlier in the Gita, it was used as a synonym for karma-yoga. But 
the main point is that this higher consciousness is not attained by 
hard effort but as a gift from a merciful, loving God.

--- PAGE 165 ---
Chapter 10
157
The answer to the question of what it is that motivates 
Krishna to act in this way is given in verse 11, where Krishna 
says anukampa artham, ‘due to compassion’. Krishna has a loving 
relationship with his devotees, and so he feels compassion 
for their plight in this world. Therefore he delivers them by 
bestowing upon them the consciousness that brings liberation 
from rebirth.
Where is Krishna located according to this passage?
Here we find a clear statement of the location of the Deity 
within the core of our being. Krishna is atma-bhava-stha, which 
means he is situated in the existence of the atman. The precise 
meaning of this phrase is a little hard to determine. Shankara 
and other Advaitins would argue that it confirms the Upan-
ishadic view of the oneness of the atman and Brahman, but 
Vaishnavas suggest that the Deity expands himself as an antar-
yamin manifestation that accompanies the soul and guides it as 
it transmigrates through different lives. This latter idea finds 
some confirmation in 18.61. In either case, the point here is 
that Krishna is situated not only as an aloof, transcendent God 
looking down on us but he is present here as well within the 
very core of our being.
At this point, the flow of the discourse changes abruptly and 
Arjuna comes to the fore once more. Here we see that he firstly 
confesses his acceptance of Krishna’s identity as the Supreme 
Deity, and then asks an important question concerning how a 
person in this world can constantly think of Krishna.
Verses 12–15: Arjuna accepts Krishna’s divine status
12.	 Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the 
supreme abode and the supreme purifier. You are the 
eternal divine purusha, the primordial Deity, unborn 
and all-pervading.
13.	
All the rishis speak of you in this way, including 
Narada the divine rishi, Asita, Devala, and Vyasa. Now 
you yourself are declaring it to me.

--- PAGE 166 ---
Bhagavad-gita
158
14.	
I accept everything you have said to me as true, O 
Keshava. Neither the gods nor the Danavas (asuras) 
can understand your manifestation, O Lord.
15.	
You alone can understand your own Self by your own 
power, O Supreme Person, for you are the source of 
all living beings. You are the Lord of all beings, the 
god of gods, the Lord of the world.
Here, Arjuna accepts that Krishna is indeed the Deity who has been 
spoken of in these chapters as the creator and controller of the world. 
Each of the terms Arjuna uses here could be analysed in more detail, 
for each of them is filled with profound meaning – the Supreme 
Brahman, the Supreme Abode, the eternal divine person etc. 
It seems that Arjuna had earlier heard about Krishna’s divine 
nature from sages such as Narada, Devala, Asita, and Vyasa. In 
the Mahabharata, we frequently hear of encounters between the 
Pandavas and various holy men, some of whom refer to Krishna 
in these terms. However, Krishna is Arjuna’s friend and cousin 
and so perhaps we should not be too surprised to learn that it 
is only at this point that Arjuna has fully accepted the fact that 
Krishna is an avatar of Narayana. In verses 14 and 15, we again 
encounter the idea that the cause knows the effect, the creator 
knows the creation, but the flow of knowledge cannot move 
in the opposite direction. Hence, as the creator of all things, 
Krishna knows all things, but concomitantly there is nothing 
that can have knowledge of Krishna. As it is said of Brahman in 
the Upanishads, he is beyond the range of conception even for 
the gods and celestial rishis.
Verses 16–18: How can one conceive of Krishna?
16.	 You should now fully explain your own divine glo-
ries. Tell me about those glorious attributes through 
which you pervade these worlds and remain present 
within them.
17.	
How can I come to know you, O yogin, and con-
stantly fix my mind upon you? In what forms of exis-
tence can I conceive of you, O Lord?

--- PAGE 167 ---
Chapter 10
159
18.	
Speak to me again at length, Janardana, about this yoga 
of yours and your glorious power (vibhuti). I am never 
fully satiated when hearing these ambrosial words.
Now, Arjuna makes his request which will carry the discussion 
forward into its next phase. He accepts Krishna’s divine nature, 
but it is interesting to note that he now asks about the Deity’s 
presence not in some heaven in the sky but here in this world. 
He asks about the glories of God as they are manifest in the 
world around us. Again this reminds us of Krishna’s words at the 
beginning of Chapter 7, ‘all of this rests upon me, just as jewels 
are strung upon a thread’ and at the beginning of Chapter 9, ‘I 
pervade this entire world in my avyakta-murti, my non-manifest 
or invisible form’. Krishna is all around us and yet we do not 
perceive him, so now Arjuna is asking for help with this prob-
lem. How can we come to perceive Krishna’s invisible presence 
within the world? The reply that Krishna gives is both poetic 
and surprising.
Verses 19–38: Krishna’s presence within this world
19.	 The Lord said: Very well, I will speak about my own 
divine attributes, but only those that are most promi-
nent, O best of the Kurus, for there is no limit to the 
extent of my manifestation.
20.	 I am the atman, Gudakesha, situated in the hearts of all 
beings. I am the beginning of the living beings and I 
am their middle and end as well.
21.	 Amongst the Adityas I am Vishnu, amongst luminous 
objects I am the radiant sun. Amongst the Maruts I 
am Marichi and amongst stars I am the moon.
22.	 Of the Vedas I am the Sama Veda, amongst the gods I 
am Vasava (Indra). Amongst the senses I am the mind 
and amongst living beings I am consciousness.
23.	 Amongst the Rudras I am Shankara, amongst the Yak-
shas and Rakshasas I am Vittesha. Amongst the Vasus 
I am fire (Agni) and amongst high-peaked mountain 
I am Meru.

--- PAGE 168 ---
Bhagavad-gita
160
24.	 Amongst priests know me to be Brihaspati, the fore-
most amongst them. Amongst generals I am Skanda 
and amongst bodies of water I am the ocean.
25.	 Amongst the great rishis I am Bhrigu, amongst utter-
ances I am the one syllable (om). Amongst yajñas I 
am the Japa Yajña and of things that move not, I am 
Himalaya.
26.	 Amongst all the trees I am the Ashvattha (fig) tree, 
amongst the divine rishis I am Narada. Amongst the 
Gandharvas I am Chitraratha and amongst those who 
have achieved perfection I am the sage Kapila.
27.	 Amongst horses, know me to be Ucchaihshravas 
who appeared from the nectar. Amongst the lords of 
the elephants I am Airavata and amongst men I am 
the sovereign.
28.	 Amongst weapons I am the thunderbolt, amongst 
cows I am the kamadhuk. Amongst progenitors I am 
Kandarpa and amongst serpents I am Vasuki.
29.	 Amongst the Nagas I am Ananta, amongst those who 
inhabit the waters I am Varuna. Amongst the ances-
tors I am Aryaman and amongst those who exert con-
trol I am Yama.
30.	 Amongst the Daityas I am Prahlada, amongst those 
who calculate I am time. Amongst beasts I am the 
lion, the king of the beasts, and amongst birds I am 
Vainateya (Garuda).
31.	
Of purifiers I am the wind, amongst those who bear 
weapons I am Rama. Amongst fishes I am the Makara 
and amongst rivers I am Jahnavi (Ganga).
32.	 Amongst created objects I am the beginning and the 
end and I am the middle as well, Arjuna. Of all forms of 
knowledge I am knowledge of the atman and in debat-
ers I am the ability to reach the ultimate conclusion.
33.	 Amongst letters I am the letter ‘a’, amongst compound 
words I am the dual word. I am time that has no end 
and I am the Ordainer facing all directions.

--- PAGE 169 ---
Chapter 10
161
34.	
I am death who devours everyone, I am the origin 
of all things yet to be. Amongst feminine virtues I 
am fame, good fortune, speech, memory, intelligence, 
endurance, and forgiveness.
35.	
Of the Sama hymns I am the Brihat Sama and 
amongst Vedic metres I am the Gayatri. Of the 
months I am Margashirsha and of the seasons I am 
that which brings the flowers.
36.	 Amongst cheats I am dicing, I am the energy of those 
who possess energy. I am victory, I am resolution, and 
I am the existence of all that exists.
37.	
Amongst the Vrishnis I am Vaasudeva (Krishna), 
amongst the Pandavas I am Dhanamjaya (Arjuna). 
Amongst sages I am Vyasa and amongst seers I am the 
seer named Ushanas.
38.	 Amongst those who chastise I am punishment, 
amongst those who seek victory I am good policy. 
Amongst secrets I am silence and I am the wisdom of 
the wise.
There is, of course, much that could be said here by way of com-
mentary, and one might be curious to discover the identity of 
the different persons, creatures, and objects referred to in each of 
the verses. Most of these will be familiar to those well versed in 
the study of the Mahabharata, Ramayana, and Puranas, and we do 
not have the scope here to explore each verse in detail. For our 
purposes, it is sufficient to look at the passage as a whole and to 
try to establish the broader significance of this poetic exposition. 
We might note the following points:
Krishna’s opening statement, aham atma (‘I am the atman within 
all beings’) can be regarded as philosophically significant. This 
identity of Krishna-atman-brahman is fundamental to Shankara-
charya’s understanding of the Bhagavad-gita, for it allows him to 
interpret teachings on devotion to Krishna to mean dedication 
to realisation of the true self.
Arjuna’s question is katham vidyam aham (‘How am I to know 
you’ or ‘How am I to conceive of you’), and so we might feel that 

--- PAGE 170 ---
Bhagavad-gita
162
the answer given here is not so much a philosophical exposition 
as an aid to realisation. The world we live in is filled with awe-
some phenomena that fill the beholder with wonder; so Krishna 
is saying that the wonder we experience in relation to the natural 
world should help us perceive the glory of the creator of that 
natural world. Moreover, that glorious opulence perceived in 
nature is present there because of the pervasive presence of the 
glorious Deity. So our feelings of awe and wonder on seeing 
mountains, various creatures, or the ocean should help us to 
appreciate the presence of God within this world.
The point has been made several times before, but again it is 
apparent that the Deity is not a purely transcendent entity who 
exists only in some higher domain. In Hindu monotheism, as 
expressed here, there is identity between the creator and the cre-
ation, and this is a facet of theology that distinguishes Hinduism 
from other monotheistic faiths.
Perhaps we should not try to over-interpret these verses but 
should rather see them as a form of meditation on the glories of 
God. Even though he is not visible to our present perception, 
he can be perceived in a reflected form, for the glory of the 
creation is, in truth, the glory of God and is indicative of the 
omnipresence of God.
As mentioned above, in the final four verses of the chapter 
Krishna himself provides some interpretation of the meaning 
of the passage. 
Verses 39–42: Explanation of the divine presence
39.	 And I am that which is the seed of all living 
beings, Arjuna. There is no living being, moving or 
non-moving, which exists without me.
40.	 There is no end to my divine glories, Paramtapa; what 
I have revealed is just an indication of the extent of 
my glory.
41.	 You should understand that whenever a glorious form 
of existence displays its opulence or power, this arises 
from a small part of my splendour.

--- PAGE 171 ---
Chapter 10
163
42.	
But what is the need for you to understand it to its 
full extent, Arjuna? It is enough to know that I am 
present here, sustaining the whole world with just one 
part of myself.
The main point that we should note here is the distinction between 
the Bhagavad-gita’s teachings and what Christians often refer to as 
‘natural theology’. The Christian idea is that one can understand the 
existence of the creator because of the complexity and evidence of 
design in the created world. It is an argument based on inference. 
However, the creator is a remote figure who has formed the world 
whilst remaining separate from it, just as the evidence for the exist-
ence of a pot maker can be seen in the pot he has created, although 
the person himself is no longer visible. Krishna’s argument here 
shares some of those ideas, but the crucial difference is that there 
is a clear statement of identity between creator and creation. The 
world is wonderful not just because it was created by a wonderful 
Deity, but because of the presence of the Deity within the creation. 
Christians may say that ‘God is everywhere’, by which they usually 
mean that the power of God is all-pervasive. For the Gita it is the 
actual presence of God that is all-pervasive, although as yet we do 
not have the eyes to see it.
How is Krishna the ‘seed’ of all existence?
One must presume that here, the word ‘seed’ indicates that Krishna 
is the primary source from out of which the world emerges and 
which imbues it with life and consciousness. He is not so much the 
creator as that from which the world emerges, perhaps like a spider 
spinning its web. The spider does not use external substances but 
emits its creation from out of its own existence. So Krishna is the 
creator, the source, and that which gives life to the world.
Following on from verse 39, Krishna explains in verse 40 that 
he has merely touched upon his divine glories and attributes. In 
the previous verses, Krishna has not given an exhaustive account 
of his own glories as they exist in this world. It is just a hint, a 
small sample, for the full extent of his glory, majesty, and divine 
potency cannot be described.

--- PAGE 172 ---
Bhagavad-gita
164
Krishna’s presence in this world
An important point is made here, which adds to our understand-
ing of the previous teachings on the immanence of the Deity 
within the manifest world. Here we see again that the identity of 
God with the world is asymmetrical. The world is nothing but 
the Deity, but the world is only a small part of his total existence. 
The wonders of the world may fill us with awe, but they are not 
the full potency of God; they are just his tejomsha, a small part 
of his energy (tejas amsha). So when we say that God is present 
within this world, we must understand that this does not mean 
that the fullness of his existence is manifest here. He is present 
in the world, but only in the form of a small part of himself, 
expanded in order to sustain the order of creation.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 10
Chapter 10 of the Bhagavad-gita can be understood as having four 
main components. It starts with a reassertion and summation of 
the principal ideas previously stated about the nature of God and 
the power of devotion to God. He is to be known as the origin of 
the world and to be venerated by acts of devotion. This arouses his 
compassion so that he delivers the devotee from this world and grants 
liberation from rebirth as a gift of divine grace. In the second phase, 
Arjuna says that he accepts Krishna’s divine identity and asks how 
the invisible presence of God within the world can be known. Then, 
in the third phase, the chapter provides illustrations of the glorious 
features of this world, asserting that their individual majesty should 
be understood as indicative of the divine presence. The glories of 
this world abound because of the glorious Lord’s pervasive presence 
here. So though it is an avyakta-murti, a non-manifest presence, it can 
be perceived in the glory of the world it pervades. This is explained 
in the final phase of the chapter in which Krishna states that he is 
the seed from which the world emerges, and that the wonderful 
features of this creation represent only one part of his full glory.

--- PAGE 173 ---

165
Chapter 11
A
t the end of the tenth chapter, Krishna explained that 
he pervades the world by means of a single part of his 
energy. Arjuna has already accepted the divinity of 
Krishna but in this chapter he takes the treatise on to its next 
stage by asking to see directly the avyakta-murti, the invisible 
presence of God that pervades the world. This can only be 
done when one has acquired a higher perception and this is 
granted to Arjuna as a gift of grace. The Gita then moves away 
from its usual form, in which Krishna presents teachings to 
Arjuna, and the vision of the divine revelation is described 
to us through the words of Arjuna himself. So this chapter 
of the Bhagavad-gita stands out as beingdistinct because it 
contains little by way of direct teachings, and for a short time 
we are given a descriptive account of the nature of God as it 
is revealed to Arjuna.
Verses 1–4: Arjuna’s request for a 
vision of the divine presence
1.	
Arjuna said: For my benefit you have explained the 
ultimate mystery, which is known as the adhyatma. 
Through this explanation my illusion is now gone.
2.	
I have heard from you at length about the beginning 
and end of the living beings, O lotus-eyed one, and 
about your inexhaustible power.
3.	
You are certainly what you have described yourself to 
be, O Parameshvara, and I now wish to behold that 
glorious form of yours, O Purushottama.

--- PAGE 174 ---
Bhagavad-gita
166
4.	
If you think it is possible for me to see it, O Lord, 
then reveal to me your unchanging Self, O Yogeshvara. 
Arjuna’s request here is straightforward. Krishna has given a 
theoretical explanation of his identity as the Supreme Deity, 
referred to here as the supreme mystery known as adhyatma. We 
may recall that this term was earlier defined, at Arjuna’s request, 
as a part of the opening section of Chapter 8. Adhyatma means 
‘in relation to the atman’, and so one must presume that Arjuna’s 
understanding is that Krishna has revealed himself to be the inner 
self of all beings. This may give us a further clue to the meaning 
of the discourse in Chapter 10, for we will recall that Krishna 
began the revelation of his glories with the words aham atma 
gudakesha sarva-bhutashaya-sthitah, ‘I am the atman, O Gudakesha, 
situated in the heart of all beings.’ Or it may be that adhyatma is 
used in relation to the statement in verse 2 that Arjuna has heard 
about the beginning and end of all living beings.
The point of Arjuna’s request here is that he now wants 
to directly perceive the philosophical truth about the divine 
nature that has just been revealed to him. He wants a vision 
of God!
Verses 5–8: Krishna agrees to Arjuna’s request
5.	
The Lord said: Behold, O Partha, hundreds and thou-
sands of my divine forms; they are of various different 
types, of many colours and configurations.
6.	
Behold the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Ashvins, and Maruts, 
numerous things that have never before been seen. 
Behold these wonders, O Bharata.
7.	
Now behold the entire world with its moving and 
non-moving creatures situated as one within my body, 
O Gudakesha, and whatever else you wish to see.
8.	
But you cannot see me in this way with your own 
eyes and so I give to you divine vision. Now behold 
my glorious yoga!
Without hesitation, Krishna agrees to grant Arjuna’s request and 
gives him prior warning of what he is about to see. (In verse 8, the 

--- PAGE 175 ---
Chapter 11
167
word ‘yoga’ refers to mystical powers and not religious practice). 
It is interesting to note that there is no suggestion here that the 
divinity of Krishna will be displayed in the form of Vishnu with 
four arms. It will be a multi-faceted form in which all the Vedic 
gods will be seen as a part of the body of the Supreme Deity 
along with all the other living beings. Again one is reminded 
that Krishna has identified himself as the soul within all beings, 
and hence the manifestation of the divine form will include all 
living beings, past, present, and future.
But of course this is an avyakta-murti (9.4) that we do not 
perceive even though we exist as a part of it. Therefore, as a gift 
of grace, Krishna bestows upon Arjuna the realised vision, the 
divya-chakshus, which enables him to see the world in a different 
light, not as the place in which he and other living beings exist 
but as a manifestation of God himself. Here one is reminded of 
Krishna’s earlier statement, dadami buddhi-yogam tam yena mam 
upayanti te, ‘I give them that buddhi-yoga by means of which 
they come to me’ (10.10). The higher, realised knowledge can 
be obtained by strenuous effort and renunciation, but it is also 
a gift of divine grace given by God as an expression of his love 
and compassion.
Verses 9–14: Manifestation of the Vishva-rupa
9.	
Samjaya said: When he had spoken these words, O 
king, Hari the great lord of yoga revealed to Partha 
his supreme, glorious form.
10.	
It had many mouths and eyes and many features won-
derful to behold. It had many divine ornaments and 
many divine weapons, raised aloft.
11.	
It was adorned with celestial garlands and raiments 
and was anointed with celestial perfumes. This lim-
itless Deity was wondrous in all ways, with faces on 
all sides.
12.	
If a thousand suns were to rise in the sky at the same 
time, each with a blazing effulgence, it might then 
resemble the wondrous radiance of that great being.

--- PAGE 176 ---
Bhagavad-gita
168
13.	
The Pandava then saw the entire world, undivided 
and yet manifold, situated there in one place within 
the body of the god of gods.
14.	 Thereupon Dhanamjaya became filled with wonder 
and the hair on his body stood erect. Bowing his 
head to that Deity and placing his palms together, he 
then began to speak.
There have been numerous attempts made in art, films, televi-
sion, and even drama to depict the revelation of the vishva-rupa 
as described here in Chapter 11 of the Bhagavad-gita, but it goes 
without saying that none of these can come close to capturing 
the awesome magnificence of the revelation of God described 
here. The form revealed is inconceivable and indescribable, but 
let us note a few of the features referred to:
•	 It is a multi-faceted form, manifesting the appearance of 
many different living beings. The term vishva-rupa literally 
means having all things as its form.
•	Thus it has many faces, mouths, and eyes. If Krishna is the 
self of all beings, then all beings are a part of his form as 
displayed here.
•	This form gives off a tremendous effulgence as bright as 
many thousands of suns combined.
•	This form contains the entire world. Hence the world we 
inhabit is itself a Deity, it is a form of God.
Verses 15–31: Description of the Vishva-rupa
15.	
Arjuna said: I see all the gods in your body, O Lord, 
and the entire host of different living beings. I see 
Brahma, the lord, who remains seated on a lotus, and 
all the rishis and celestial serpents.
16.	 With so many arms, bellies, mouths, and eyes, I see 
you with this unlimited form that spreads everywhere. 
There is no end, no middle, and no beginning as I 
behold you, for you are the Lord of the world and the 
world is your body (vishva rupa).
17.	
I see you with a crown, club, and disc, and your 

--- PAGE 177 ---
Chapter 11
169
fiery effulgence illuminates all directions. I see you 
everywhere though you are so difficult to look 
upon, for the blazing light of fire and sun spreads 
beyond measure.
18.	 You are the Supreme Akshara (undeteriorating), that 
which must be known. You are the ultimate abode 
of this world. You are unfading (avyaya), the guard-
ian of the eternal dharma and I regard you as the 
eternal purusha.
19.	 You are without beginning, middle, or end, and have 
limitless power. You have innumerable arms and the 
sun and moon are your eyes. I see you with blazing 
fire as your mouth as you heat this entire world with 
your radiance.
20.	 From the heavens to the earth, the whole sky is per-
vaded by you alone and so are all the directions. After 
seeing this wonderful and yet terrible form of yours 
the three worlds are trembling, O Mahatma.
21.	 These hosts of celestial beings are entering into you; 
some are afraid and praise you with folded palms. The 
hosts of rishis and perfect beings (siddhas) proclaim the 
sound svasti, and glorify you with hymns and words 
of praise.
22.	 The Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, Sadhyas, Vishva-devas, 
Ashvins, Maruts, ancestors, Gandharvas, Yak-
shas, Asuras, and Siddhas are all beholding you in 
utter astonishment.
23.	 This great form of yours has many mouths and eyes, O 
mighty one, and has many arms, thighs, and feet. It has 
many bellies and many fearsome teeth. After seeing 
this form the worlds tremble in fear and so do I!
24.	 You are radiant and multicoloured, you touch the 
limit of the sky, your gaping mouths are wide open 
and your wonderful eyes are blazing. Seeing you thus, 
my inner self is trembling with fear; I cannot maintain 
my steadiness or composure, O Vishnu.

--- PAGE 178 ---
Bhagavad-gita
170
25.	
Seeing your mouths with their terrible teeth, which 
are like the flames at the end of the world, I can no 
longer recognise the directions or find any peace. Be 
merciful, O Lord of the gods, abode of the world.
26.	 All these sons of Dhritarashtra along with this host of 
the kings of the earth, as well as Bhishma, Drona, the 
suta’s son, and the great warriors of our army as well
27.	 Are all rushing forth and entering your mouths with 
those terrible teeth that are so terrifying. Some of 
them can be seen caught between those teeth with 
their heads being crushed.
28.	 As the many currents of the rivers rush with force and 
flow towards the ocean, so these heroes amongst men 
enter your blazing mouths.
29.	 As moths meet with destruction by rapidly entering a 
blazing fire, so the people of the world rush forward 
and meet with destruction by entering your mouths.
30.	
Devouring the worlds from all sides, you lick them all 
up with your blazing mouths. Having filled the entire 
universe with its energy, this terrible effulgence of 
yours is scorching everything, O Vishnu.
31.	
Tell me who you are with this fearful form. I bow 
down to you, be merciful, O greatest of the gods. I 
wish to know you, the primordial being. I cannot 
comprehend the acts you are engaged in.
Here, Arjuna describes the vision he is now able to behold and 
expresses his sense of awe and indeed terror at this dramatic 
manifestation of divine potency. He is both thrilled and intim-
idated by what he sees.
The deities who are absent from the vishva-rupa.
All the gods are contained within the body of the Deity, includ-
ing Brahma, who is seen in his usual position seated on a lotus 
flower; however, there is no mention of either Vishnu or Shiva. 
In some translations, the word isham, ‘the Lord’, is taken as a 
reference to Shiva rather than Brahma, but this seems unlikely 

--- PAGE 179 ---
Chapter 11
171
as the whole phrase reads brahmanam isham kamalasana-stham 
so that isham appears in between ‘Brahma’ and ‘situated on his 
lotus seat’. We know that Krishna is Vishnu himself (and Arjuna 
addresses him as such in verses 24 and 30), so Vishnu is outside 
and beyond the world, but the description here raises questions 
as to why Shiva is not named as a part of the vishva-rupa and 
indeed about the Bhagavad-gita’s awareness of Shiva.
Arjuna’s reaction to the vision of the divine
In verses 23–25, Arjuna describes his reaction to the vision he 
sees before him, and it is nothing like the beatific joy mentioned 
in Chapter 6 in relation to the yogin’s realisation of the atman. 
The form he sees is not benign; rather, it is fearsome, destructive, 
and terrifying, and Arjuna is overwhelmed by a sense of terror 
and confusion. His realisation of God is not a blissful experience 
but a vision of the awesome power and destructive aspect of the 
divine. In this sense, the vision he sees is somewhat related to the 
usual representation of the character of Shiva. It also reflects the 
true nature of the world, which, on the one hand, provides for 
the needs of living beings but at the same time has a destructive 
force that takes away the life of every one of us.
Does this form represent Krishna’s  
earlier teachings on the nature of God?
The form displayed here does indeed correspond to the philo-
sophical or theological descriptions presented at the beginning of 
Chapter 7 and then again at the start of Chapter 9. In 9.4, it was 
said, maya tatam idam sarvam jagad avyakta-murtina, ‘I pervade this 
whole world through my non-manifest form.’ Now, the avyak-
ta-murti (non-manifest form) has become a vyakta-murti (manifest 
form), and we see what Krishna was talking about earlier.
A preordained destiny
In verses 26–30, Arjuna particularly notes that his three most 
dangerous adversaries – Bhishma, Drona, and Karna – are being 
destroyed by the teeth of the Deity. Hence he need have no 

--- PAGE 180 ---
Bhagavad-gita
172
concern about the outcome of the battle, for their fate is already 
sealed due to the power of God. There is much significance in 
this part of the vision for it indicates that the outcome of the 
battle is even now decided, a point Krishna will refer to when 
he speaks to Arjuna about his identity.
How does Arjuna refer to Karna in verse 26?
Arjuna refers to Karna as suta-putra, ‘the son of a suta’, a rather 
contemptuous term that refers to Karna’s upbringing as the son 
of a charioteer. In fact, Karna was the son of Kunti and Aditya, 
the sun god, but the Pandavas were unaware that he was their 
elder brother and had despised him for his low birth. It is perhaps 
noteworthy that in verse 34 below, Krishna refers to him by name, 
though of course, this could just be due to the requirements of 
the verse metre.
Verses 32–34: Time, the great 
destroyer of the worlds
32.	 The Lord said: I am all-powerful time that brings 
destruction to the world. My activity here is to put an 
end to these worlds. Even without you, none of these 
warriors assembled here in battle array will survive.
33.	
Therefore arise and win renown. Defeat your enemies 
and enjoy a prosperous kingdom. These warriors are 
already slain by me and you should merely be my 
instrument, Savyasachin.
34.	
Drona, Bhishma, Jayadratha, Karna, and the other 
heroic warriors have already been killed by me, so 
you may slay them without hesitation. Fight and you 
will defeat your enemies in the battle.
Here Krishna responds to Arjuna’s question by stating that he 
is time, the great destroyer of worlds (and we might note that 
Oppenheimer said that he immediately recalled this verse and 
verse 12 when he witnessed the first explosion of the atomic 
bomb). Where Krishna says, kalo ‘smi (‘I am time’), we might 
equally translate it as, ‘I am destiny.’ In other words, the allotted 

--- PAGE 181 ---
Chapter 11
173
time has arrived for the deaths of all these warriors, and their 
fate is unavoidable. Arjuna may think of himself as the killer, 
but in fact he is just the instrument of destiny, which is perhaps 
another way of saying the instrument of God who takes the 
form of destiny.
So this vision and this passage relate back to the very begin-
ning of the Bhagavad-gita in which Arjuna was lamenting and 
refusing to kill his friends, respected elders, and close relatives. 
Now, however, the truth is apparent; whether Arjuna decides 
to fight or not fight is irrelevant. These warriors will die not 
because of Arjuna’s decision but because it is their destiny or 
perhaps because it is the will of God.
Now this part of the vision raises a very fundamental question 
about free will and determinism. Do we have any choices about 
the actions we perform and the results our actions yield, or are 
the outcomes already determined by the unbreakable force of 
destiny? This latter view does certainly seem to be the conclusion 
of this passage but we should perhaps be a little cautious. Let us 
not forget that the Battle of Kurukshetra is not an ordinary event, 
for the Supreme Deity himself has appeared there as an avatar in 
order to ensure that the desired result is achieved. So it may be 
that the vision of the outcome reflects these special circumstances 
rather than indicating a law of universal determinism in which 
free will is wholly absent.
Verses 35–46: Arjuna’s prayers
35.	
Samjaya said: After hearing Keshava’s words, Kiritin 
joined his palms and paid his respects whilst trembling 
in fear. He then addressed Krishna again in stuttering 
tones, bowing down in a mood of awe and fear.
36.	 Arjuna said: As is appropriate, Hrishikesha, the world 
is delighted by your glorification and becomes joyful. 
Whilst the terrified rakshasas flee in various directions, 
the hosts of perfect beings bow down before you.
37.	
Why should they not bow before you, O Mahatma, 
for you are greater even than Brahma, the original 

--- PAGE 182 ---
Bhagavad-gita
174
creator of the world. You are the unlimited lord of 
the gods, the abode of the world; you are the aksha-
ram, (that which does not decay); you are being and 
non-being and that which lies beyond both.
38.	 You are the original Deity, the primeval purusha. You 
are the ultimate resting place of this world. You are 
the knower and that which is to be known, the 
supreme, the abode. This entire world is pervaded by 
you, O you of limitless form.
39.	 You are Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, the Moon, Prajapati, 
and the great-grandfather. I bow to you, I bow to 
you a thousand times over, and then still I bow to you 
once again.
40.	 I bow to you from the front, I bow from behind, and 
I bow from all sides, for you are everything. Your 
power is unlimited and your might cannot be mea-
sured. It is you alone who reach into all things, and 
therefore you are that which is all things.
41.	
Thinking of you as a friend, I spoke presumptuously, 
saying, ‘O Krishna, O Yadava, O my friend.’ I was 
unaware of your greatness and I did this because I did 
not understand, or perhaps out of affection.
42.	
Making jokes, I behaved improperly towards you 
whilst we were passing time together, resting, sitting, 
or eating, sometimes when we were alone and some-
times when others were present, Achyuta. Now I beg 
your forgiveness for you are beyond all measure.
43.	 You are the father of the moving and non-moving 
beings, you are the object of worship for the world 
and you are the greatest teacher. No one is your equal 
so how could anyone in the three worlds be greater 
than you? Your power is unrivalled.
44.	 Therefore I bow down to you and prostrate my body. 
I seek your grace for you are the worshipful Lord. 
Please tolerate my conduct, O Lord, as a father to a 
son, a friend to a friend, or a lover to his beloved.

--- PAGE 183 ---
Chapter 11
175
45.	
I was thrilled to see this form that was never previ-
ously seen, but my mind is disturbed by fear. Now 
show me that other form, O Lord. Show me mercy, 
O lord of the gods, abode of the world.
46.	 I now wish to see you with a crown, a club, and a 
disc in your hand. O thousand-armed one, O Vishva 
Murti, please now assume once more your four-
armed form.
Now Arjuna is completely overwhelmed by the vision he has seen. 
It was displayed at his request but the effect has been altogether 
too much for him to bear. Krishna is a benign, personal Deity 
with whom Arjuna had developed a close relationship based on 
love and affection, but this manifestation of God is something 
different. Arjuna’s response is therefore simply to prostrate him-
self before the Deity, to beg for His mercy, and then to ask that 
the form he is beholding be withdrawn. We might note the 
following points:
Here again we see that Arjuna is terrified rather than inspired 
by the manifestation of the divine he has been granted a vision 
of. In fact he is barely able to speak, so great is his terror.
Verse 39 can be regarded as significant. Here, we find Arjuna 
asserting that the Vedic gods are in fact Krishna himself, presum-
ably because he has seen all of them forming a part of the Deity’s 
vishva-rupa. On this basis, one might regard the Vedic hymns that 
glorify these gods as being dedicated to the one Supreme Deity. 
Again the Hindu tradition seems able to reconcile polytheism 
with monotheism.
Verse 40 contains the words sarvam samapnoshi tato ‘si sarvah, 
‘You achieve all things and therefore you are all things.’ This 
accords with the Upanishadic statement, sarvam khalv idam 
brahma, ‘This whole world is Brahman.’ We might refer to 
Brahman as ‘that which is all things’ and here we see that the 
same definition can be applied to the Deity of the Bhaga-
vad-gita. And if we wanted to get technical in our use of 
language, we might say that the Gita is able to reconcile mon-
otheism with monism.

--- PAGE 184 ---
Bhagavad-gita
176
Perhaps the most significant point here, however, is the way 
in which Arjuna now regrets his previous intimate behaviour 
with Krishna. A significant idea in devotional Hinduism, and 
in the Bhagavata Purana in particular, is the way that a devotee 
develops this mood of intimate love with God and with Krishna 
in particular. But here we see that this mood of intimate love is 
incompatible with the fear of God that arises from realisation of 
his full awesome potency. The Bhagavata Purana narrates a story 
about Krishna as a child in which he is accused by his friends of 
eating dirt. When his mother, Yashoda, looks inside to Krishna’s 
mouth, she sees the vishva-rupa within the child, but the vision is 
immediately withdrawn as it threatens the intimacy of the loving 
relationship between Yashoda and Krishna. In the same way, we 
see here how the closeness of Arjuna’s relationship with Krishna 
is undermined by this inescapable revelation of the power of God.
In the last two verses, Arjuna asks Krishna to withdraw this 
form and show him instead the four-armed form with helmet, 
club, and disc. This clearly refers to the usual iconic representation 
of the four-armed Vishnu form. The identity of Krishna with 
Vishnu is not taken any further by the Gita, and indeed there 
is nothing to suggest that Krishna responds to this request of 
Arjuna. However, we have a clear indication here that Krishna 
is indeed accepted by the Gita as an avatar of Vishnu.
Verses 47–50: Krishna reassumes his human form
47.	
The Lord said: It was as an act of grace, Arjuna, that I 
displayed that supreme form to you by means of my 
own powers of yoga. That form is filled with energy, 
it is universal, it is unlimited and primeval. I have 
never displayed it to anyone but yourself.
48.	 Not through the Veda, yajña, recitation, charity, ritual, 
or harsh austerity can I be seen in this form by 
anyone other than you in the world of men, O hero 
of the Kurus.
49.	 Do not tremble with fear and do not be bewildered 
after seeing this form of mine, which is so fearful. Let 

--- PAGE 185 ---
Chapter 11
177
your fears be dispelled and let your mind be con-
tented; now behold once more that form of mine.
50.	
Samjaya said: After speaking to Arjuna in this way, 
Vasudeva again revealed to him his own form. That 
great soul consoled the frightened Arjuna by again 
assuming his benign form.
Here, Krishna accepts Arjuna’s request and agrees to withdraw 
the vishva-rupa that has appeared to be so fearful. There are just 
a few points here we might note:
Where Krishna refers to ‘yoga’ in verse 47, I think we must 
take the word as meaning mystical powers rather than religious 
or meditational practice.
Verse 47 also states that this form had never been displayed 
before, but it is widely known that Krishna had previously 
displayed the vishva-rupa in the assembly of the Kurus when 
Duryodhana and his followers were planning to make Krishna a 
prisoner (Chapter 129 of the Mahabharata’s fifth book, the Udyo-
ga-parvan). However, the revelation described there is not on the 
same scale as that perceived by Arjuna, and one must therefore 
presume that this was only a partial manifestation.
Verse 48 gives a list of the means that are inadequate to allow 
the practitioner a vision of this form, but it does not say how 
such a vision may be gained; this, however, is made clear before 
the end of the chapter.
The two forms of the Deity are referred to as rupam ghoram 
(v. 49), a frightful form, and saumya-vapu (v. 50), a benign form. 
Despite Arjuna’s apparent request in verse 46 for a vision of the 
Vishnu form, the saumya-vapu seems to be Krishna in his more 
usual human appearance. Thus we can see that the Supreme 
Deity can be both ferocious (ugra) and benign (saumya).
Verses 51–55: Bhakti Is the key to knowledge of God
51.	
Arjuna said: Seeing this benign human form of 
yours, Janardana, my mind is now at peace and I have 
regained my normal condition.
52.	 The Lord said: It is very hard to gain a vision of this 

--- PAGE 186 ---
Bhagavad-gita
178
form of mine that you have seen. Even the gods are 
always longing for a vision of this form.
53.	
Not through the Vedas, austerity, charity, or sacrificial 
offerings is it possible to see me in the way that you 
have seen me here.
54.	
Only through undivided devotion, Arjuna, is it pos-
sible to know me and to see me in this form and 
indeed to enter into me, Paramtapa.
55.	
One who performs his deeds for me, regards me as 
supreme, becomes my devotee, remains free of attach-
ments and has no hatred for any living being will 
come to me, Pandava.
In these final verses of the chapter, Krishna tells of the means by 
which the realisation of God’s presence can be obtained. 
What form (rupa) is Krishna referring to in verse 52?
It could be that Krishna is here referring to the form Arjuna 
has described in verse 51, the manushya-rupa, the human form 
that is saumya or benign. This, however, seems unlikely. Almost 
certainly, Krishna is here discussing the vishva-rupa, although 
after Arjuna’s experience we might wonder as to why the gods 
are so desirous of having that realisation. The point is that 
what Arjuna has been shown is the presence of God within 
the world, something which is usually avyakta or invisible 
to mundane eyes, even those of the gods. But this vision is 
equivalent to the spiritual realisation that brings liberation 
from rebirth.
Gaining a vision of the divine form
Verse 53 repeats the point made in verse 48 to the effect that most 
religious practices are ineffective in leading one to the highest 
stage of realisation. In verse 54, however, we are told that this 
vision can be attained through bhakti, devotion to the Deity. Here 
we might recall verse 3 of the fourth chapter in which Krishna 
promised Arjuna that the greatest secret would be revealed to 
him because he was a devotee of Krishna.

--- PAGE 187 ---
Chapter 11
179
The final phrase of verse 54
Verse 54 is rather unusual in the Gita because of the way in 
which it describes the attainment of liberation from rebirth. Here, 
Krishna says that through undeviating devotion one is able to 
know him (jñatum), to see him (drashtum), and to enter him 
(praveshtum). This idea of moksha as entering into the Deity is 
found in other passages of the Mahabharata, but in the Gita it is 
found only in this verse and perhaps in 18.55.
The qualities of a devotee as referred to in verse 55
Four qualities are noted here: (i) Performing works for Krishna 
(mat-karma-krit), which again equates karma-yoga with bhakti, (ii) 
being dedicated to Krishna (mat-parama), (iii) being free of attach-
ment (sanga-varjita), and (iv) being free of enmity towards any 
living being (nirvairah sarva-bhuteshu); in other words practising 
the virtue of ahimsa – not harming.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 11
Chapter 11 is very different from the other chapters of the Bhaga-
vad-gita as it contains little by way of instruction from Krishna to 
Arjuna. Instead we have a revelation of Krishna’s divine identity, 
Arjuna’s description of the form he sees, and then the prayers he 
offers to this manifestation of God. 
The chapter opens with Arjuna asking if he can directly behold 
the glory of God, which is invisibly present within this world. 
Krishna agrees to this request and grants Arjuna the higher vision 
by means of which the presence of God can be directly perceived. 
Arjuna then describes the awesome vision he sees, with its 
manifold forms and blazing effulgence. Within that form he 
also sees the future outcome of the battle about to take place 
at Kurukshetra and the deaths of the mighty warriors who are 
assembled there on both sides. 
Krishna reveals that he is time or destiny, which takes away 
the lives of all beings. It is he who controls life and death, and 
as a warrior Arjuna is just an instrument in the inevitable pro-
gression of time. In a mood of confusion, fear, and awe, Arjuna 

--- PAGE 188 ---
Bhagavad-gita
180
then offers prayers to Krishna, praising his omnipotence and 
regretting his previous familiar conduct. At Arjuna’s request, 
Krishna withdraws the vishva-rupa and reassumes his benign 
human form. He concludes by explaining that devotion to God 
is the only way by which this extraordinary vision of the divine 
presence can be gained.

--- PAGE 189 ---

181
Chapter 12
A
fter the vishva-rupa is withdrawn, the Bhagavad-gita’s 
teachings on the nature of God and devotion to God 
are almost complete, though Krishna does briefly return 
to this topic in the chapters that follow. In effect, the revelation 
of the vishva-rupa does not amount to a new doctrine but rather 
a demonstration of the philosophical truths about the nature of 
God presented in Chapters 7, 9, and 10. We will recall, how-
ever, that in the last two verses of Chapter 11, Krishna made the 
point that the higher vision through which the presence of the 
Deity can be perceived is obtained only through devotion. At 
the start of Chapter 12, Arjuna picks up on that point and seeks 
clarification over the efficacy of the two paths Krishna has been 
describing, the way of pure bhakti and the realisation of spiritual 
knowledge. We may recall that in Chapter 9, verses 14 and 15, 
Krishna described these as the two ways by which mahatmas, great 
souls, dedicate themselves to him. And yet at the end of Chapter 
11, Krishna mentioned only bhakti as the means of perceiving the 
vishva-rupa. So now Arjuna wants some clarification of that point 
and in particular a definitive judgement as to which of the two 
paths is superior. This question provides the starting point for 
the final phase of the Bhagavad-gita’s instruction on devotion 
to God, in which the emphasis is placed on the effectiveness of 
bhakti in bringing the highest spiritual goals and also the mood 
of intimate love that is developed between the Deity and the 
devotee. And so here again we have an important passage that 
establishes the basis for the devotional spirituality that is such a 
salient feature of Hinduism today.

--- PAGE 190 ---
Bhagavad-gita
182
Verses 1–5: Bhakti or jñana,  
which is the superior path?
1.	
Arjuna said: Between those devotees who dedicate 
themselves to you, being constantly engaged in the 
way you have described, and those who revere the 
non-manifest akshara feature, who have the superior 
understanding of yoga?
2.	
The Lord said: In My opinion, those who fix their 
minds on me, who constantly engage in serving me 
and who possess absolute faith are engaged in the best 
way possible.
3.	
But those who dedicate themselves to the non-deteri-
orating (akshara), indeterminate, non-manifest feature, 
which is present everywhere, is unknowable, and is situ-
ated in the transcendent realm, unmoving and constant,
4.	
Who control their senses and who are equal-minded 
in all ways also attain me, delighting as they do in the 
welfare of all beings.
5.	
But there is greater difficulty involved for those 
whose thoughts adhere to the non-manifest feature. 
For embodied beings the way to the non-manifest 
feature is one of suffering.
Looking back over the Bhagavad-gita, we can see that Krishna first 
emphasised karma-yoga and showed how the mood of renunciation it 
engenders leads to the acquisition of spiritual knowledge, the jñana 
that can be attained through the yoga of meditation. Then, from 
Chapter 7, Krishna turned to discuss the way of bhakti, concluding 
that this is the means of gaining higher realisation and liberation 
from rebirth. So now, Arjuna wishes Krishna to state clearly which 
of these two spiritual paths is superior. He wants a judgement made 
between them, just as he did at the start of Chapter 5 when he 
asked about karma-yoga and renunciation of action.
Which of the two paths does Krishna judge to be superior?
Krishna is quite clear in the answer he gives to Arjuna’s question; 
it is the devotees referred to at the end of Chapter 11 who are 

--- PAGE 191 ---
Chapter 12
183
yuktattama, engaged in the best form of practice. This verdict is 
one that might surprise many Hindus, for it is often presumed that 
bhakti is a lesser path to be followed by those who lack the capac-
ity to pursue the higher goal of jñana. Here, however, Krishna 
gives an alternative view. We might note how Shankaracharya 
comments on these verses. He points out that the jñanins have 
already achieved realised knowledge and so they do not need to 
engage in any form of practice or yoga and it is for this reason 
that Krishna describes the devotees as the yuktattama. This is a 
brilliant response, but one may have some doubts as to whether 
it is actually what Krishna means.
What aspect of the deity is sought by those who seek the 
all-pervasive, akshara feature?
To some extent the answer here is given in the question. The 
devotees focus their attention on a personal God who has a spe-
cific form and identity, but the jñanins seek to realise the formless, 
inconceivable divinity designated as Brahman in the Upanishads. 
These two aspects of the divine are frequently referred to as 
sa-guna brahman (brahman with qualities) and nirguna brahman (brah-
man without qualities) and the commonly held view is that nirguna 
brahman is the higher, ultimate feature of God. It is important 
to recognise that the Bhagavad-gita accepts that there are two 
aspects to the divine nature: (1) as the formless, inconceivable, 
all-pervasive Brahman; and (2) as the personal Deity who is the 
object of loving devotion for the bhaktas. The rather surprising 
feature of the teachings here is that Krishna insists that worship 
of a personal Deity is the superior path, and hence we must 
conclude that the Gita is primarily a bhakti-shastra.
The equivocal nature of Krishna’s answer 
In making his verdict, Krishna does not adopt a line of discourse 
that praises one form of spirituality and simultaneously condemns 
another. In this sense, the Gita is an archetypal Hindu text that 
allows and embraces diversity in a manner that is fundamentally 
tolerant. It accepts that both ways lead to the same the goal and 

--- PAGE 192 ---
Bhagavad-gita
184
hence both are approved of. In verse 5, Krishna seems to explain 
the reason for the decision he has given. It is not that bhakti is 
inherently superior to jñana, it is just that it is easier to practice, 
and here we might recall Krishna’s words at the start of Chapter 
9 when he said that this spiritual path is su-sukham kartum, very 
joyful or very easy to perform. And as Arjuna suggested at the 
end of Chapter 6, non-devotional forms of spirituality can be very 
difficult. So it is not that bhakti is inherently better than jñana, it 
is just that the highest goal is more easily attained by this means.
The reason why it is easier is explained in the next two verses.
Verses 6–7: The grace of God – Krishna saves
6.	
But for those who are devoted to me, who surrender 
all their actions to me, who worship me and meditate 
on me through single-pointed yoga, 
7.	
I become without delay the deliverer from the ocean 
of death and rebirth, Partha, for their consciousness is 
absorbed in me.
Here Krishna explains why it is that bhakti is a superior religious 
path to follow. It is more effective in leading the aspirant to 
liberation from rebirth because it invokes the grace of the Deity, 
as was explained earlier in Chapter 10, verse 11. It is very hard 
to achieve this highest goal alone but for Krishna it is easily 
done, and he personally intervenes on behalf of the devotees to 
ensure their liberation. In verse 7, Krishna refers to himself as 
the sam-ud-dhartri, ‘the one who lifts up’. Who does he lift up? 
The devotees described in verse 6. Where does he lift them from? 
Mrityu-samsara-sagarat, from the ocean of death and rebirth. Where 
does he lift them up to? That is not stated, although we might 
here refer to verses 54 and 55 of the previous chapter in which 
Krishna said that the devotees enter him, praveshtum mam, and 
go to him, mam eti. So here, we have a Hindu doctrine of grace, 
which must sound very familiar to Christians. We often see the 
words ‘Jesus Saves’ displayed outside churches, and here we see 
the same idea from a Hindu source. With one slight difference, 
as here it is ‘Krishna saves’.

--- PAGE 193 ---
Chapter 12
185
Verses 8–12: Different types of devotion
8.	
Set your mind on me alone; let your understanding 
enter into me. You will then dwell in me alone, of 
this there is no doubt.
9.	
If you are not able to hold your consciousness steadily 
upon me, then you should seek to attain me by means 
of regulated yoga practice, O Dhanamjaya.
10.	
If you are unable even to undertake this regulated 
practice, then dedicate yourself to working on my 
behalf. By performing acts on my behalf you can still 
achieve success.
11.	
And if you are unable to undertake the practice of 
yoga dedicated to me, then gain self-control and prac-
tise the renunciation of the fruits of all action.
12.	
Knowledge is better than regulated practice and 
meditation is superior to knowledge. Renouncing 
the fruits of action is better than meditation for from 
renunciation comes unending peace.
In verse 8, Krishna gives instruction again as to the devotional 
practices that will invoke the saving grace referred to in 6 and 7. 
It is all about being constantly absorbed in thinking of Krishna 
and this might be through yoga and meditation, as was discussed 
in Chaper 8, or it might just be a natural part of love of God, for 
the mind inevitably gravitates towards anyone who is an object 
of our love. This would seem to be the indication in verse 9 of 
Chapter 10. And in the later part of this chapter, it is the idea of 
love of God that is brought to the fore.
The remaining verses of this passage give alternative practices 
that can be taken up by those who find that they are unable 
to fix their minds on Krishna as directed by verse 8. Here we 
are reminded of Arjuna’s objection to dhyana-yoga at the end 
of Chapter 6, and the way in which yoga and bhakti are drawn 
together into one system in Chapter 8. It seems that the fixing 
of the mind and intellect on Krishna, mentioned in verse 8, 
are more likely to be a part of the yoga of meditation than 
absorption based on love. As we have seen, this yoga is very 

--- PAGE 194 ---
Bhagavad-gita
186
difficult to practice, so here Krishna offers a list of alternatives 
in a progressive order.
Here they are:
•	 Fixing the mind and intellect on Krishna, 
•	 regulated yoga exercises,
•	 dedicating one’s work to Krishna,
•	 renouncing the results of action as an offering to Krishna.
What we seem to have here is a list that gives a reverse sum-
mation of the main points of spiritual practice that Krishna has 
hitherto presented. The ultimate goal is fixing the mind on 
Krishna and this seems very close to the type of yoga practice 
taught in Chapters 6 and 8 where the final goal is realising 
the atman within one’s own being. And because Krishna is the 
inner self of all beings, this practice is almost identical to bhakti. 
If one finds that one’s mind wanders, then one must keep up 
the practice until it is controlled as was explained in Chapter 
6, verse 36, where Krishna responded to Arjuna’s objection. 
However, if one is unable to engage in this time-consuming 
regular practice, then there is still the process of karma-yoga, 
which here seems to be divided into two phases. Verse 11 
appears to refer to the karma-yoga we noted in Chapters 2, 
3, and 4, which centres on the renunciation of attachment 
to the fruits of action. Above that, however, is the practice 
referred to in verse 10 where karma-yoga becomes imbued 
with a mood of bhakti and working without attachment is 
achieved by dedicating this work to Krishna. Hence we have 
a reinforcement of the understanding that the Bhagavad-gita 
as a whole presents a progressive spiritual path that leads from 
one step to the next.
Verse 12 is one that has proved to be problematic for both 
ancient and modern commentators as it seems to reverse the 
order of priority given in the previous four verses. Various solu-
tions have been suggested by different commentators and I do 
not propose to go into these in detail, as it is the subject for a 
detailed verse by verse analysis rather than a general study of the 
Gita’s teachings such as this one.

--- PAGE 195 ---
Chapter 12
187
Verses 13–20: The qualities of the devotee
13.	
He has no hatred for any living being, he shows good-
will and compassion; he has no sense of possession 
and no pride, he remains equal in misery and joy, and 
he has endurance;
14.	
He is always contented, he is a yogin possessing 
self-control; he is firm in his commitment and he 
absorbs his mind and intelligence in me: such a devo-
tee is loved by me.
15.	
No one in the world has fear of him and he does not 
fear anyone in the world; he feels no elation, distress, 
fear, or passion; such a person is loved by me.
16.	
He has no hankerings, he is pure, expert, indifferent, 
free of anxiety, and he has renounced his material 
endeavours; such a devotee is loved by me.
17.	
He does not rejoice or hate, lament, or hanker, and he 
has renounced both pleasing and vile objects; such a 
devoted one is loved by me.
18.	
He is equally disposed toward an enemy and a friend, 
he regards honour and contempt as the same, he has 
equal regard for heat and cold, and for joy and misery, 
and he has given up all attachment to the world.
19.	
He is unmoved by condemnation or praise, he is silent 
and satisfied with whatever befalls him, he has no per-
manent abode, and he is steady in his understanding; 
such a devoted one is loved by me.
20.	 Those who venerate with full faith the immortal 
teaching based on dharma which I have spoken here, 
who are dedicated to me and are my devotees, are 
dearly loved by me.
The second half of this chapter describes the devotee whom 
Krishna delivers from the ocean of death and rebirth.
The description of the devotee in these verses
The verses here give an extensive list of the qualities to be found 
in a person designated by Krishna as mad-bhakta (‘my devotee’ or 

--- PAGE 196 ---
Bhagavad-gita
188
‘one who is devoted to me’), and most, if not all, of these refer 
to the mood of detachment from the world exhibited by the 
devotee. Moreover, very little is said about devotional sentiment 
or devotional practice here; it is all about renunciation of desire, 
remaining equal despite good and bad fortune, having no enmity 
towards any living being, and being unmoved by praise or blame. 
In fact, there is very little to distinguish between the devotee 
described here and the practitioner of dhyana-yoga discussed in 
Chapter 6. I think this is significant, particularly if we are aware 
of Shankaracharya’s view that devotion to Krishna means dedica-
tion to the realisation of the atman within one’s own being. Now 
one might dismiss this interpretation as being just the view of 
an Advaitin trying to extract from a devotional text a meaning 
that does not contradict his own preconceptions. There may be 
some truth in such criticism, but there are certainly indications 
within the Gita that would support Shankara’s view, and the 
way it describes dhyana-yogins and devotees who worship God in 
almost identical terms is certainly one such indication.
Krishna’s attitude towards the devotee and its significance
The Bhagavad-gita is in many ways a book of paradoxes. We 
have just discussed how the description of the devotee given 
here is virtually identical to the representation of the yogin who 
pursues realisation of the inner self, and yet alongside that we 
have a fundamental difference. Here we find that Krishna repeat-
edly uses the words (with minor differences) yo mad-bhaktah sa 
me priyah, ‘one who is my devotee is loved by me’. This ties in 
with the notion of compassion given in 10.11 as the reason why 
Krishna delivers his devotees. The answer is simple – it is because 
he loves them. Here the word priya is unequivocal and refers 
to a relationship of reciprocal love between one individual and 
another. Hence this word could not be applied to the yogin who 
attains knowledge of the atman for his joy comes from realisation 
of his own self-identity. But in this case there is Krishna as one 
person and the devotee who is another, and between them there 
is a relationship of love which motivates the Deity to bestow his 

--- PAGE 197 ---
Chapter 12
189
grace so that the devotee is freed from death and rebirth. We 
will find this important idea restated even more emphatically at 
the end of the Gita, in verse 66 of the Chapter 18. This notion 
of divine love comes to play a dominant role in later Hinduism, 
but as is so often the case we can trace the origins of the different 
strands of Hindu spirituality back to the Bhagavad-gita.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 12
Chapter 12 draws to a conclusion the teachings that began at 
the beginning of the seventh chapter focussing on the nature 
of God, the relationship between God and the world, and the 
worship of God as a means of achieving liberation from rebirth. 
At the start of Chapter 13, we encounter another dramatic turn 
in Krishna’s pattern of teaching as he moves abruptly on to a rad-
ically different topic. The twelfth chapter began with a question 
from Arjuna that sought a judgement between the two forms 
of religion mentioned in verses 14 and 15 of Chapter 9: direct 
worship of a personal Deity and realisation of the all-pervading 
presence of God through realised knowledge. Krishna replies that 
worship of a personal God is a superior practice because reali-
sation through knowledge is a difficult path beset with troubles. 
Worship is easier because this invokes the grace of God, as he 
intervenes to liberate his devotee from the ocean of birth and 
death. Hence one should fix the mind constantly on Krishna but 
if this proves to be impossible, other forms of spiritual practice are 
recommended that can lead one gradually towards this highest 
stage. In the final phase of the chapter, Krishna describes the 
attributes of one who becomes his devotee, placing particular 
emphasis on renunciation of worldly desires and detachment 
from the fluctuating fortunes we experience in life. Here also 
he makes the point that the devotee is an object of love for the 
Deity; it is not just a formal relationship as between a king and 
his servant, for there is emotional attachment underlying the 
devotional mood. Therefore the point is made, yo mad-bhaktah 
sa me priyah: ‘one who is my devotee is an object of my love’.

--- PAGE 198 ---

--- PAGE 199 ---

191
Chapter 13
I
n the final chapters of the Bhagavad-gita, Krishna branches 
out from his earlier areas of concern and introduces a number 
of different topics so that each chapter tends to form a dis-
crete unit of its own rather than there being a consistent line 
of discussion. Chapter 13 focusses primarily on the distinction 
between the self and matter, Chapter 14 explores the concept 
of the three gunas, Chapter 15 turns again to the presence of 
God within the world, and Chapter 16 looks at the nature and 
fate of godly and evil-minded persons. Chapters 17 and 18 focus 
primarily on an analysis of human life in relation to the influ-
ence of the three gunas, before Krishna concludes with a brief 
recapitulation of the main ideas he has sought to emphasise in 
the text as a whole. All these topics have some connection with 
the main themes explored previously by the Gita, but they are 
not exactly central to its primary teachings and so are probably 
best regarded as ‘supplementary observations’. So let us begin 
this area of study with a look at Chapter 13 and its discussion 
of body and soul.
In some versions of the Sanskrit text, Chapter 13 opens with a 
question from Arjuna about the kshetra and kshetrajña, the domain 
(literally ‘field’) and the knower of the domain. In Shankarachar-
ya’s text, however, and in the Critical Edition of the Mahabharata, 
this verse is omitted and Krishna launches into the topic without 
any prior prompting. It is perhaps because of the abrupt change 
of direction that some early editors found it necessary to add 
a question from Arjuna to give some explanation as to why 
Krishna should introduce a new and different topic so suddenly. 

--- PAGE 200 ---
Bhagavad-gita
192
The kshetra is the body and the kshetrajña is the soul – these terms 
are found in other passages of the Mahabharata in which expo-
sitions of Samkhya teaching are to be found. Samkhya literally 
means ‘enumeration’ or perhaps ‘analysis’, and the central idea is 
to analyse the elements that jointly comprise the material man-
ifestation and then to differentiate them from the soul within 
the body. Normally in Samkhya texts, the words prakriti and 
purusha are used to designate matter and spirit but kshetra and 
kshetrajña are not uncommon synonyms. The ultimate aim of 
Samkhya is to attain the realisation anyo ‘ham (‘I am different’) 
in the sense that ‘my true identity is different from the body and 
mind that are products of prakriti’. Throughout the Gita, Krishna 
draws repeatedly on Samkhya terminology and concepts in the 
explanations he gives to Arjuna, but in these final six chapters 
the text is particularly influenced by Samkhya ideas. The thir-
teenth chapter is in some ways quite a complicated one, but it 
does divide itself up into neatly defined component parts that 
are given their own headings by the text itself. The first of these 
sections relates to the domain, the kshetra that is our material 
embodiment. We are then informed about jñana, knowledge, 
and then jñeya, that which we must come to know, and finally 
we move on to the division between prakriti and purusha that is 
the salient feature of Samkhya discourse. Perhaps surprisingly in 
light of what we have just been reading, there is little suggestion 
here of any role being played by a Supreme Deity in the overall 
analysis of existence.
Verses 1–4: Kshetra and kshetrajña
1.	
The Lord said: This body, Kaunteya, is referred to as 
the kshetra (field); those who understand such matters 
speak of he who has knowledge of the field as the 
kshetrajña, the knower of the field.
2.	
You should also understand that I am the kshetrajña 
present within all the kshetras, Bharata. Knowledge of 
the kshetra and kshetrajña is knowledge indeed; that is 
my opinion.

--- PAGE 201 ---
Chapter 13
193
3.	
So listen to me now as I explain briefly about the 
kshetra and what it is like, about the transformations it 
undergoes and about which one of them comes from 
the other. I will also explain who he is and what his 
powers are.
4.	
This subject has been sung about by the rishis in many 
ways in various hymns of the Veda. It has also been 
explained through reasoned conclusions in the apho-
risms of the Brahma Sutra.
Here, we see the introduction of the terms kshetra and kshetrajña, 
which are used in this chapter (but nowhere else) to designate 
the body and the soul. There are a couple of interesting points 
in this introductory passage that we should pay attention to.
In verse 2, Krishna indicates that he himself is the kshetrajña 
in all bodies. This could be taken simply as a reaffirmation of 
the statement of 10.19, aham atma (‘I am the atman’), in which 
the Supreme Deity is identified with the self within each person. 
This would, of course, be very close to the teachings of the 
Upanishads that identify the individual soul with the Supreme 
Soul. There is, however, an alternative view that postulates the 
existence of a manifestation of Krishna alongside the individual 
soul, the paramatman existing alongside the atman and guiding it 
through the process of rebirth, as indicated by 18.61 and other 
verses. This view is favoured by Madhvacharya and followers of 
the Dvaita philosophy, who cannot accept any degree of iden-
tity between God and the individual soul. The debate between 
these two interpretations is one we will have to follow as the 
chapter progresses.
Verse 4 contains an interesting reference to the Brahma Sutra 
(Vedanta Sutra). The Brahma Sutra is well known as one of the 
principal texts of the Vedanta school and has been commented 
upon by all the major acharyas, including Shankara, Ramanuja, 
Madhva, and Vallabha. Most Western scholars believe that this 
work is a later composition and reference to it here in the Gita 
has given rise to some debate. Zaehner comments, ‘The Brahma 
Sutras ... may not have existed (at the time of Gita) in their 

--- PAGE 202 ---
Bhagavad-gita
194
present form, but it seems more than likely that collections of 
aphorisms concerning the nature of brahman, that is, the nature 
of the Absolute, were in circulation already.’
Verses 5–6: Explanation of the kshetra
5.	
The great elements, the sense of ego (ahamkara), the 
intellect (buddhi), matter in its non-manifest state 
(avyakta), the eleven senses, and the five objects 
they perceive,
6.	
Desire, loathing, joy, misery, the aggregate of all facul-
ties, consciousness, and resolve; this in short is what is 
known as the kshetra, along with the transformations 
it undergoes.
Here the chapter’s topic-by-topic analysis begins with a discussion 
of the kshetra, the field that verse 1 explained was the body, or 
in other words the material component of a living being. We 
should note the following points here:
At the start of Chapter 7 (v. 4), prakriti or matter was said to 
consist of eight component elements: earth, water, fire, air, space, 
mind, intellect, and ahamkara (the sense of ego). In the Samkhya 
teachings found elsewhere in the Mahabharata, the analysis of 
prakriti in terms of its component elements is a typical feature 
of the discourse. The number of elements referred to does vary 
between speakers, but the number most usually arrived at is 24, 
and this is also the number given by the Samkhya Karika, the 
classical work on Samkhya composed by Ishvarakrishna.
Here, verse 5 gives a breakdown of the elements and if we 
count them we can see that the Bhagavad-gita confirms the 
existence of 24 elements of matter as taught in classical Samkhya 
philosophy. 
The list is as follows:
•	 (1–5) the great elements (five in number: earth, water, fire, 
air, and space),
•	 (6) ahamkara,
•	 (7) intellect (buddhi),
•	 (8) the non-manifest state of matter (avyakta),

--- PAGE 203 ---
Chapter 13
195
•	(9–19) the eleven senses (usually listed as sight, hearing, 
touch, taste, smell, and mind as the senses of perception, and 
hands, feet, voice, anus, and genitals as the senses of action),
•	 (20-24) the five objects perceived by the senses (form/colour, 
sound, touch sensations, flavour, aroma).
Thus, we can see that the analysis of the kshetra given here in 
the Gita conforms to the usual enumeration of the elements of 
matter given by Samkhya teachings.
The list given in verse 6 is of the transformations experienced 
by the body as a result of external stimulation. Hence, this short 
passage concludes with the words etat kshetram samasena sa-vikaram: 
‘this in brief is the kshetra along with its transformations’.
Verses 7–11: Explanation of jñana
7.	
Avoiding pride and deceit, not harming, patience, 
honesty, serving the acharya, purity, steadfastness, 
self-control,
8.	
Detachment from the objects of the senses, being 
free of the sense of ego, perceiving the problem 
inherent in the misery of birth, death, old age, disease, 
and suffering,
9.	
Being without attachment and without affection for 
sons, wife, home, and other such things, always main-
taining an equal disposition whatever happens, be it 
desirable or undesirable,
10.	
Maintaining undeviating devotion to me through 
yoga fixed on no other point, living in a deserted 
place, taking no pleasure in other people’s company,
11.	
Constant dedication to the knowledge designated as 
adhyatma (relating to the atman) and perceiving the 
true object of knowledge; all this is said to be jñana 
(knowledge) and everything else is said to be ajñana 
(ignorance).
In these five verses, Chapter 13 gives us its definition of jñana, 
which is usually taken to mean knowledge or perhaps the realised 
knowledge that brings liberation from rebirth.

--- PAGE 204 ---
Bhagavad-gita
196
The Bhagavad-gita’s definition of knowledge
This definition of jñana is probably not the one we would have 
given if asked, nor what we expected to read. It is unusual because 
knowledge is defined in terms of a state of detachment from the 
changing fortunes of the world, and a way of life based on the 
renunciation of material aspirations rather than an intellectual 
process. The implication here is that jñana is not just about what 
we know but is about our realisation of the truth and our percep-
tion of reality. Knowledge is not just the learning of a series of 
facts and figures but is reflected in the way we conduct ourselves 
and our attitude towards the world around us. When we realise 
the spiritual reality, that jñana becomes manifest in a sense of 
detachment from material things and a mood of indifference to 
the material manifestation. The lesson here is that jñana is not 
like the knowledge we can acquire from the education system, 
which may or may not affect the way we live, but is a realisation 
of the truth that will profoundly affect our whole mode of being.
The sort of person this teaching is aimed at
It would seem that the lifestyle and view of the world indicated 
here under the heading of jñana are for renunciants who have 
given up their existence in conventional society. In the Ramayana, 
we find that dharma is shown to include a deep sense of loyalty, 
commitment, and responsibility towards family members, but 
here a different notion of proper conduct is indicated by the 
words asaktam anabhishvangah putra-dara-grihadishu, being without 
attachment or affection for children, wife, and home. One might 
question whether it is possible to function effectively as a family 
member if one has no sense of attachment or affection for one’s 
sons and daughters or indeed if such a mood is truly desirable. 
The point here is that Hindu teachings cover a range of different 
understandings of dharma. In the Ramayana, the dharma that is 
revealed is the dharma for life in this world, but what is being 
discussed here is a moksha dharma that takes us wholly beyond 
this world into the realm of adhyatma jñana, absolute knowledge 
of the spirit and liberation from repeated birth and death.

--- PAGE 205 ---
Chapter 13
197
The significance of verse 10
Verse 10 refers simultaneously to bhakti, devotion to the Deity, 
and yoga practice based on meditation. This link between two 
apparently divergent forms of Hindu spirituality is a feature of 
the Gita’s discourse we have noted before and can at least par-
tially be resolved by an understanding of the identity between 
Krishna, the Supreme Deity, and the atman that is our own 
innermost being.
Verses 12–18: Explanation of jñeya, 
‘that which must be known’
12.	
I shall now speak about the jñeya, the object we must 
strive to know, for when this is known one attains 
immortality. It is without beginning, it is the Supreme 
Brahman (or it is without beginning and depen-
dent on me); it is said that it is neither existent nor 
non-existent.
13.	
Its hands and feet are everywhere, its eyes, heads, and 
mouths are everywhere, its ears are everywhere in the 
world; thus it remains, pervading all things.
14.	
It appears to have the attributes of senses and yet in 
truth it is devoid of senses. It is without attachment 
but it supports all things, it is free of the gunas and yet 
it experiences the gunas.
15.	
It is both outside and within the living beings; it 
moves and yet it is unmoving. Because of its subtle 
nature it is hard to know; it is far away but very close 
as well.
16.	
It appears to be divided up within different living 
beings and yet it remains undivided. This sustainer of 
living beings is the jñeya that which must be known; it 
devours them and it brings them into being as well.
17.	
It is the light of luminous objects and is said to be 
beyond the darkness. It is knowledge, the object that 
should be known, and it is accessible through knowl-
edge; it is situated within the heart of all beings.

--- PAGE 206 ---
Bhagavad-gita
198
18.	
Now kshetra, jñana, and jñeya have all been briefly 
explained. After realising this truth, my devotee 
becomes ready to achieve my state of existence.
We have just been given a definition of the process of knowing 
that rests on a mood of detachment from the world, or in other 
words a process of knowing that enables us to see the world 
and our own existence in a wholly different light so that we no 
longer live and relate to the world around us in the way that 
we did before. And if our lifestyle and attitude are unchanged, 
then we may possess learning but we do not possess knowledge. 
Now in this passage we are instructed about the jñeyam, the 
object on which the knowledge focusses, literally, ‘that which 
is to be known’.
So what is it that we must know? Here are its characteristics:
•	 It has no beginning
•	 It is the supreme Brahman
•	 It is neither existing nor not existing
•	 Its eyes, ears, etc. are everywhere
•	 It appears to have senses, but is without senses
•	 It is not attached to anything
•	 It is the support of everything
•	 It is untouched by the gunas
•	 It experiences the gunas
•	 It is within us and outside of us as well
•	 It is hard to perceive
•	 It is both far away and very close
•	 It appears to be divided in different living beings, but 
is undivided
•	 It sustains living beings
•	 It destroys and creates living beings
•	 It is the origin of light in the world
•	 It is always beyond the darkness
•	 It is knowledge and it is the object of knowledge
•	 It is within the hearts of all beings
The above list shows how close this passage is to the teachings of 
the Upanishads, and on the basis of Upanishadic doctrine I think 

--- PAGE 207 ---
Chapter 13
199
it is reasonable to state that the jñeya is the atman within each of 
us, which is identical with Brahman and with Krishna himself. 
There is also a line of continuity to be detected here with the 
manifestation of the vishva-rupa in Chapter 11. 
Let us take each verse in turn in our analysis of this significant 
and rather difficult passage:
Verse 12: Here the classical Vedantic idea of moksha through 
realised knowledge is restated. The second line of the verse is 
problematic because it can be read in two different ways, either 
anadimat param brahma, or anadi-mat-param brahma. In the former, the 
suffix mat means being or possessing the quality and is added to the 
word anadi to mean possessing the quality of having no beginning. 
Param brahma means ‘the supreme brahman’, a phrase used by Arjuna 
in 10.12 to glorify Krishna. The second reading leaves anadi to 
stand alone as ‘without beginning’ and then links mat to param to 
give the meaning ‘dependent on me’. Brahma then stands alone 
as Brahman, which is dependent on Krishna, as is indicated later 
in the last verse of Chapter 14. Both these interpretations appear 
equally valid and, as might be expected, Shankaracharya opts for 
the former, Ramanujacharya for the latter.
Verse 13: This verse is an exact quotation from the Shvetash-
vatara Upanishad (3.16). It shows similarities with the revelation 
of the vishva-rupa and it seems to indicate that the same spiritual 
manifestation, atman or Brahman, is present in every living being.
Verse 14: This verse describes the position of the atman within 
the body. It appears to be in contact with the senses through 
which it perceives the world and to be in contact with the three 
gunas of which matter is comprised, and yet it is untouched by 
matter, remaining always transcendent and aloof because of its 
distinct spiritual identity. The suggestion here is similar to Shan-
kara’s notion of illusion; the self appears to be a part of this world 
but, as Samkhya teaching emphasises, it is always wholly distinct. 
The first line continues the quotation from the Shvetashvatara 
Upanishad (3.17).
Verse 15: This verse seems to be making a similar point to 
that revealed by verse 5 of the Isha Upanishad, which says that 

--- PAGE 208 ---
Bhagavad-gita
200
the self moves and yet moves not. This of course is a paradox, 
but the self is paradoxical because it is not controlled by the rules 
of time and space that prevail in the material domain. In the 
second line, we have a further paradox. The topic being discussed 
is jñeya, that which is to be known, but here it is referred to as 
avijñeya, that which cannot be known. Again the paradox can be 
resolved by reference to the Upanishads, for the Kena Upanishad 
teaches that Brahman cannot be described or conceived of, but 
it can be known by means of higher realised knowledge, which 
it refers to as pratibodha jñana, literally ‘awakened knowledge’. 
And the final phrase, a further paradox, seems also to be derived 
from verse 5 of the Isha Upanishad. According to the Gita, the 
atman is durastham chantike cha tat, far away and yet close at hand, 
whilst the Upanishad states tad dure tad antike, which has exactly 
the same meaning.
Verse 16: Here the first line seems to confirm the Vedantic 
view that the individual nature of the atman is an illusion. The 
jñeya appears to be divided (vibhaktam iva) but is in fact undivided 
(avibhaktam). This is in line with the Upanishadic doctrine of 
the absolute oneness of Brahman despite the appearance of a 
multiplicity of individual souls. The final phrase, devouring and 
manifesting, reminds us again of the vishva-rupa, the mouths of 
which were seen by Arjuna to be devouring the warriors on the 
battlefield. However, it could also indicate that the life and death 
of living beings are determined by the presence and absence of 
the atman, and so in this sense it manifests and it devours.
Verse 17: The phrase ‘light of lights’ is taken from the Brihad 
Aranyaka Upanishad (4.4.16), which discusses the nature of Brah-
man. There is also a connection here with the statement of 15.6 
of the Gita, which indicates that the abode of the Lord is not 
illuminated by the sun, moon, or fire. In other words, the soul 
is radiant with its own spiritual effulgence and is not dependent 
on any other luminous object. In fact, the light of the sun, moon, 
and fire is merely a reflection of the spiritual radiance that is 
imperceptible to mundane eyes. Here again we may recall how 
Arjuna was shocked by the blazing effulgence of the vishva-rupa, 

--- PAGE 209 ---
Chapter 13
201
which was compared to the light of a thousand suns. Brahman is 
knowledge, it is that which must be known and it can be known, 
presumably by the pratibodha jñana of the Kena Upanishad. And 
because atman and Brahman are one (ayam atma brahma), it is 
located in the heart of every living being, as is stated here.
Verse 18: This is one of the link verses that help to divide the 
thirteenth chapter into discrete units. This section is ended, and 
Arjuna is reminded that he has now heard about kshetra, jñana, and 
jñeya, the material domain (field), the process of knowing, and 
the object that is to be known. Furthermore, the point is made 
again that this process of knowledge will elevate the knower to 
the higher spiritual status in which Krishna himself exists. Here 
also we get a brief reminder of the Gita’s emphasis on bhakti, as 
we are informed that it is the devotee of Krishna who acquires 
this liberating knowledge.
Verses 19–23: Prakriti and purusha
19.	 You should understand that both prakriti (matter) and 
purusha (spirit) have no beginning. You should also 
know that all transformations and the gunas have their 
origin in prakriti.
20.	 In terms of the enactment of the process of cause and 
effect, prakriti is said to be the ultimate cause whilst in 
the experiencing of joy and misery, purusha is said to 
be the cause.
21.	 Whilst situated within the domain of prakriti, the puru-
sha experiences the attributes that arise from prakriti. 
Attachment to these attributes is the cause of the puru-
sha’s birth in both auspicious and inauspicious wombs.
22.	 The Supreme purusha within the body is the witness 
and the one who grants permission, the sustainer, the 
enjoyer, the great Lord (maheshvara). It is he who is 
spoken of as paramatman (the supreme soul).
23.	 Whatever a person’s state of existence, if he thus 
understands purusha, as well as prakriti with its gunas, 
he never takes birth again.

--- PAGE 210 ---
Bhagavad-gita
202
A notable feature of the teachings of the Bhagavad-gita is the 
manner in which it utilises different religious ideas and philo-
sophical systems, and in Chapter 13, we find ideas that appear 
based on both Samkhya and Vedanta. The previous passage on 
the jñeya is closely related to the Vedanta of the Upanishads, but 
this next section of the text is based on the Samkhya division 
between prakriti and purusha, matter and spirit or body and soul. 
This dualism and the realised knowledge of our spiritual identity 
are the key feature of the knowledge taught by Samkhya as the 
means of gaining liberation from rebirth. As is so often the case, 
however, the philosophy of the Gita is subtly different from the 
classical expositions of the system, and this is certainly the case 
here where the discourse enters the domain of Samkhya thought. 
It always seems to be the case that Krishna does not precisely set 
out the classical expositions of orthodox philosophy, but rather 
draws on and makes use of different systems in establishing the 
unique revelation that is the Bhagavad-gita.
Why are both prakriti and purusha  
said to be without beginning?
We are familiar with the idea that the soul, the purusha or atman, is 
eternal but we usually assume that matter is temporary. In Christian 
theology, neither matter nor the human spirit is without beginning 
for both are creations of God. Hindu teachings reveal the eternality 
of the soul but talk of the creation of the world at a specific point 
in time. Here, the word prakriti refers not to the world we see 
around us, although this is formed from prakriti, but to the primal 
material substance. The world repeatedly comes into being and is 
then withdrawn, but the primal substance out of which its varieties 
emerge is eternally existing. It is for this reason that the Gita states 
that both prakriti and purusha have no beginning.
The relationship between prakriti and purusha  
and how they are combined
The Samkhya view is that despite the existence of purusha within 
prakriti (as stated here: purushah prakriti-sthah) they remain entirely 

--- PAGE 211 ---
Chapter 13
203
distinct. They are wholly different forms of existence, and hence, 
it is impossible for them to intermingle in any way. The purusha 
exists as the one who experiences prakriti, but it is never truly a 
part of the prakriti existence. There is something of a problem 
here because, as stated in verses 20 and 21, the purusha does 
experience the effects of joy and misery as a result of attachment 
to the attributes of prakriti, and this in turn suggests a signifi-
cant degree of involvement. The question arises as to how an 
entity that is wholly distinct from matter can simultaneously be 
affected the fluctuations of matter. The Vedantic answer is that 
ultimately this world is not real, but Samkhya does not share this 
view. Hence, we must conclude that the relationship between 
prakriti and purusha is a very subtle one. They are entirely distinct 
but at the same time there is a close relationship between them.
Who or what is the paramatman mentioned in verse 22?
Various commentators, including Robert Zaehner, have suggested 
that the paramatman of verse 22 is different from the purusha of 
verse 21. This is a view that is in line with the theistic doctrines 
of the Vaishnavas, but for Shankaracharya and other Advaitins 
the distinction is between the self in a state of bondage and the 
liberated self. It is up to the individual reader to make up his 
or her own mind on this. There is quite clearly a difference of 
emphasis between the two verses. In verse 21, we read that the 
purusha experiences the attributes of matter and must undergo 
rebirth because of attachment to those attributes. But in verse 
22, we read about an entity designated as maheshvara, paramatman, 
and purushah parah, all of which suggest power and supremacy. 
However, there is no indication from the text itself that the sub-
ject for discussion has changed, and we must be aware that texts 
such as the Katha Upanishad, which the Gita draws on, refer 
to the atman as the highest principle. For the theist reader the 
differences between the two verses will suggest the distinction 
between God and the living being, but for the non-theist they 
show the distinction between the bound and liberated states of 
existence of the soul.

--- PAGE 212 ---
Bhagavad-gita
204
What previous teaching is hinted at in verse 23?
Here the phrase ‘even though he is active in many different ways’ 
harks back to the earlier teachings on detached action and indeed 
to Arjuna’s preliminary inquiry. The karma-yoga teachings are 
long past by now, but they are not forgotten. It is fascinating to 
see how despite its ranging over different topics and its drawing 
on different sources, the Bhagavad-gita retains its own unique 
perspective throughout all its different phases and thereby retains 
a sense of unity despite the diversity of the ideas it sets forth.
Verses 24–34: Knowledge and 
the goal of knowledge
24.	 It is by means of the self that some perceive the self 
within themselves through meditation. Others do this 
through the yoga based on Samkhya and others again 
through karma-yoga.
25.	 Then there are still others who do not gain knowl-
edge by any of these means but devote themselves to 
the self after hearing from other people. Dedicating 
themselves what they have learnt in this way, they too 
go beyond death.
26.	 You should understand that every being that has come 
into existence, moving or non-moving, arises from 
this combination of kshetra and kshetrajña, Bharata.
27.	 The Supreme Lord is equally present in all living 
beings; when the body is destroyed he is not destroyed. 
One who can perceive his presence truly sees.
28.	 By perceiving the same Lord situated everywhere 
a person will not harm the self by means of the 
self. As a result of this realisation he goes to the 
supreme abode.
29.	 All types of action are performed by prakriti (matter) 
alone. The atman is never the performer of action. 
One who sees this truly sees.
30.	 When a person sees the manifold existence of living 
beings situated as one entity and that they expand 

--- PAGE 213 ---
Chapter 13
205
from out of that one entity, he then attains Brahman.
31.	
Because it is without beginning and is untouched 
by the gunas, even though it is situated within the 
body, this unchanging paramatman does not act and is 
not defiled.
32.	
Just as all-pervasive space is never contaminated due 
to its subtle nature, so the atman, situated within the 
body in all places, is not contaminated.
33.	 And just as the sun alone illuminates this whole 
world, so the kshetrin within it illuminates the entire 
kshetra, Bharata.
34.	
Persons who possess the eye of knowledge can com-
prehend the distinction between kshetra and kshetrajña, 
and the liberation of living beings from prakriti. Such 
persons reach the supreme.
These verses provide the conclusion to the ideas this chapter is 
seeking to convey, asserting once again the distinction between 
body and soul and the idea that realisation of this distinction is 
a means by which moksha is attained. This is the fundamental 
idea on which the Samkhya philosophy rests and in this sense the 
Bhagavad-gita is here confirming the Samkhya darshan, though 
it does so in its own unique manner. Here we should note the 
following points.
Verses 24 and 25 again show the Bhagavad-gita’s acceptance 
of the existence of different paths to the same final goal, here 
designated as perception of the inner self and crossing beyond 
death. Krishna mentions dhyana-yoga, Samkhya, karma-yoga, and 
learning from a teacher as means by which this goal can be 
attained. The slightly surprising feature here is that bhakti is not 
included. This could be either because meditation on the self is 
regarded as the same as devotion to Krishna, as other passages of 
the Gita seem to suggest, or it could be because the way of bhakti 
is regarded as a wholly alternative means of spiritual progress, as 
indicated by Arjuna’s question at the start of Chapter 12.
Verse 26 merely restates the idea that a living being exists in 
this world as a combination of body and soul, here again referred 

--- PAGE 214 ---
Bhagavad-gita
206
to as kshetra and kshetrajña, ‘field’ and ‘field-knower’. In verses 
27 and 28, however, we again confront the difficulty of how 
to interpret the word parameshvara, which literally means the 
‘Supreme Controller’ or ‘Supreme Deity’. We are told that the 
Lord is equally present in all living beings and that realisation 
of this presence is the means by which one ‘goes to the supreme 
abode’. Vaishnava commentators, and Madhvacharya in particular, 
insist that here parameshvara refers to the antaryamin expansion 
of Vishnu who accompanies and guides each individual soul 
on its passage through the cycle of rebirth. In Madhva’s view, 
parameshvara cannot refer to the individual purusha for we have 
already learned in this chapter that the purusha’s attachment to 
prakriti causes it to undergo rebirth. Other commentators, how-
ever, will say that parameshvara is a perfectly reasonable term to 
use in relation to the individual soul, for Krishna has earlier 
identified himself as the kshetrajña mentioned in verse 26, and 
the Upanishads repeatedly assert the absolute identity of atman 
with Brahman. Again, each individual reader must decide which 
interpretation seems most reasonable.
In verse 29, the discussion returns to the distinction between 
matter and spirit, here prakriti and atman. The problem with the 
theistic interpretation of the chapter is that the text would then 
seem to switch from describing the individual soul to describing 
the Deity and then back again without indicating that it is now 
discussing a new topic.
And in verse 30, we have an abrupt switch in emphasis from 
Samkhya back to Vedanta in a statement that would seem to 
indicate an Advaitic perspective, although it is more likely a 
reference to the realisation of the vishva-rupa granted to Arjuna 
as a gift of grace.
The chapter is finally summed up in the last four verses. The 
(param)atman is situated within the body, within prakriti, but 
its spiritual identity remains fundamentally unaffected by this 
apparent contact. Despite its involvement in the process of trans-
migration, the inner self remains always distinct from its material 
embodiment. Prakriti is devoid of consciousness and consciousness 

--- PAGE 215 ---
Chapter 13
207
only becomes manifest within prakriti due to the presence of 
purusha. The sun alone illuminates the whole world with light 
and in the same way the body is pervaded by consciousness that 
radiates outwards from the soul. One who comprehends this 
truth about our existence and thereby possesses self-knowledge 
attains the highest goal.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 13
The thirteenth chapter of the Bhagavad-gita marks an abrupt 
change in direction away from the discourse on bhakti that had 
marked the previous six chapters (7–12). The main point of 
emphasis here is the distinction between the soul and the body 
and the fact that realisation of this distinction will take the adept 
beyond the cycle of birth and death to the higher domain of the 
spirit. After its introduction to the teachings and a statement of 
their credentials, the text gives an analysis of the twenty-four 
elements of matter that conforms closely to the version presented 
in classical Samkhya. This Krishna refers to as an explanation of 
the kshetra, or field, a term used here to designate the material 
body. The Gita then moves on to a subject it refers to as jñana, or 
knowledge, which is here defined in terms of a mood of detach-
ment from the world and the renunciation of material desires. 
The next passage is entitled jñeya, that which is to be known, and 
here Krishna draws extensively on the wisdom of the Upanishads 
in discussing the all-pervasive presence of the atman, which is 
equated with the Deity and with the vishva-rupa revealed in 
Chapter 11. We then have a short discourse on prakriti and purusha, 
matter and spirit, which outlines their differing identities and 
their differing functions in the progression of life in this world. 
And the final verses discourse further on the transcendence and 
indeed the supremacy of the soul over matter, stressing again the 
need to realise this distinction as the means by which liberation 
from rebirth is attained.

--- PAGE 216 ---

--- PAGE 217 ---

209
Chapter 14
C
hapter 13 gave us instructions primarily focussed on the 
distinction between body and soul (the kshetra and kshetra-
jña, prakriti and purusha), which reflected the significant 
influence of Samkhya philosophy on the Bhagavad-gita. It also 
emphasised the idea that it is knowledge of this distinction which 
is the key to liberation from rebirth. In the fourteenth chapter, 
the influence of Samkhya continues as the teaching switches to 
another of its fundamental concepts, the idea of the three gunas: 
sattva, rajas, and tamas, which pervade every aspect of prakriti, 
the material manifestation. We have already encountered this 
notion at various points in the Gita as Krishna has used the idea 
to enhance and illuminate his exposition on other subjects, but 
it is here in Chapter 14 that we find the gunas and their influ-
ence explained in full. And the influence of the gunas remains a 
significant feature of the teachings that follow in the subsequent 
chapters of the text, particularly in Chapter 17 and the first half 
of Chapter 18, which consist of a threefold analysis of different 
facets of this world in relation to sattva, rajas, and tamas.
Verses 1–2: Introduction to the chapter
1.	
Once more I will speak to you about the highest 
knowledge, which is supreme amongst all types of 
knowledge. Comprehending this wisdom, all the 
sages achieve the highest perfection when they depart 
from this world.
2.	
Devoting themselves to this knowledge, they come 
to my own state of being. Hence they are not born 

--- PAGE 218 ---
Bhagavad-gita
210
at the time of creation and at the time of destruction 
they remain undisturbed.
Here, we have the Bhagavad-gita’s usual introduction to a new 
passage of teaching, pointing out that this knowledge is supremely 
important and that its proper comprehension is a means of achiev-
ing the ultimate goal of moksha.
Verses 3–4: Creation as the impregnation 
of the womb of brahman
3.	
My womb is the great Brahman and I deposit the 
seed of life therein. Thence arises the origin of all 
beings, Bharata.
4.	
Different forms appear in all the various wombs, 
Kaunteya, but the great Brahman is the womb for 
them all and I am the father who bestows the seed.
These two verses stand somewhat apart from the central theme of 
the chapter, but they are by no means unrelated to it. We might 
note the following points.
Here, Brahman is described as being the womb that the Deity 
impregnates in order to create the living beings, and one must 
presume that here mahad brahma, the great Brahman, refers to 
prakriti. This is a somewhat unusual use of the word brahman, but 
it is also found in the Mundaka Upanishad (3.1.3), which refers 
to the Deity as brahma-yoni, having brahman as his womb.
The language employed here, particularly bija (seed) and yoni 
(womb), clearly indicates a metaphor of sexual union or even a 
macrocosmic act of union between the Deity and his shakti, as 
is more typical of Shaiva doctrine. 
The idea here is that prakriti, which in Shaivism is identified 
with the Goddess, becomes filled with life and consciousness 
only when in contact with the male principle in the form of the 
Supreme Deity. This short passage is therefore a continuation of 
the ideas found in Chapter 13. Prakriti is essentially non-sentient 
and devoid of the life principle, but it becomes enlivened when 
it is impregnated with purusha, the spiritual element, which rep-
resents Krishna himself as we have heard several times before in 

--- PAGE 219 ---
Chapter 14
211
the Bhagavad-gita. It is the union of prakriti and purusha that gives 
rise to the existence of so many different types of living being, 
just as at a microcosmic level a new entity is generated through 
the union of male and female. Here, however, it is noteworthy 
that the Gita does not seek to identify the great Brahman with 
the Supreme Goddess in the manner typical of Shaiva teachings 
on creation.
Verses 5–13: A discourse on the three gunas
5.	
Sattva, rajas, and tamas are the gunas arising from 
prakriti. They bind the changeless, embodied entity 
within the body, O mighty one.
6.	
Of these gunas, because sattva is flawless it is luminous 
and has no contamination. It is through attachment to 
happiness and attachment to knowledge (jñana) that it 
causes bondage, O sinless one.
7.	
You should understand that rajas is of the nature of 
passion; it gives rise to hankering and attachment. It 
binds the embodied entity through attachment to 
action, Kaunteya.
8.	
And you should know that tamas, which is delusion 
for all embodied beings, appears due to ignorance. It 
causes bondage through negligence, lethargy, and sleep.
9.	
Sattva causes one to adhere to happiness whilst rajas 
causes adherence to action, Bharata, and by obscur-
ing a person’s wisdom tamas creates adherence 
to negligence.
10.	 Sattva prevails by subjugating rajas and tamas, Bharata; 
rajas prevails by subjugating sattva and tamas, and tamas 
prevails by subjugating sattva and rajas.
11.	
When the illumination of knowledge appears in all 
the doorways in this body then one should under-
stand that sattva has become dominant.
12.	
Greed, endeavour, engagement in activities, agitation, 
hankering; these appear when rajas becomes dominant, 
O best of the Bharatas.

--- PAGE 220 ---
Bhagavad-gita
212
13.	
Dullness, inaction, misunderstanding, delusion; these 
appear when tamas becomes dominant, O child of 
the Kurus.
Here, we have a succinct explanation of the nature of the three 
gunas and of the ways in which they bind the soul to its existence 
within the body (the word guna can mean ‘attribute’, ‘quality’, 
and also ‘rope’). 
A brief description of each of the 
gunas: sattva, rajas, and tamas
Sattva is the quality of gentility, good conduct, enlightened under-
standing, purity, and detachment. It is most usually translated as 
‘goodness’ but also includes cleanliness, wisdom, kindness, and 
the good life of a contented existence. Rajas, on the other hand, 
is all about passion, activity, endeavour, anxiety, and frustration. 
People predominated by this guna are impelled by their desires 
and ambitions towards a life of intense action and hard work. But 
tamas falls below the level of rajas. Here, there is no intensity but 
rather indolence, laziness, and folly. Those predominated by tamas 
are foolish persons who lack the wisdom to see higher truths and 
also lack the ardour to endeavour to improve their situation.
The relationship between the gunas and prakriti
In verse 5, the gunas are described as being prakriti-sambhavah, 
meaning born from or arising out of prakriti. This is slightly at 
odds with the usual view of Samkhya teachings, which state 
that the gunas are inherent qualities of prakriti. Because they are 
a part of its essential nature, the gunas are not usually referred to 
as products of prakriti as seems to be suggested here.
Spiritual and mundane jñana
In the previous chapter and even in the first two verses here, we 
saw the familiar view that jñana or knowledge was the means by 
which the aspirant achieves the goal of liberation from rebirth. 
Here both verses 6 and 11 relate sattva to jñana but they still 
regard this guna as a cause of bondage rather than liberation. 

--- PAGE 221 ---
Chapter 14
213
Verse 6 even states badnati jñana-sangena, it binds through attach-
ment to knowledge. Shankaracharya explains that as jñana is 
an inherent quality of the atman, there cannot be any sense of 
attachment to it for that would imply a distinction between 
atman and jñana. Hence the knowledge referred to here cannot 
be the pure spiritual knowledge but must be mundane learning.
Verses 14–18: The gunas and rebirth
14.	 When the embodied soul encounters death whilst 
sattva predominates, it then moves on to the 
pure worlds obtained by those who possess the 
highest knowledge.
15.	
If he meets with death whilst rajas predominates, he 
takes birth amongst those attached to action and if he 
dies whilst tamas predominates he is reborn within 
the wombs of those who are deluded.
16.	 They say that the fruit of righteous deeds is Sattvic 
and without blemish. But suffering is the fruit of rajas 
and ignorance is the fruit of tamas.
17.	
Knowledge arises from sattva and greed arises from 
rajas. Negligence and delusion arise from tamas, and 
ignorance as well.
18.	 Those who adhere to sattva move upwards, those who 
adhere to rajas remain in between, whilst those who 
adhere to tamas and follow the ways of the lowest 
guna go downwards.
In this passage, the Bhagavad-gita relates the concept of the 
three gunas to the idea of rebirth and karma. Again, the passage 
is not difficult to follow but we might note the following points.
In verse 14, the destination attained by persons who adhere to 
sattva is the higher worlds in which the gods reside, or possibly 
a birth amongst pure-hearted, prosperous, enlightened people 
in this world. The point here is that sattva alone does not lead to 
moksha; all three gunas must be transcended.
The indication of verses 15 and 18 is that those predominated 
by the quality of rajas remain in the domain of worldly action 

--- PAGE 222 ---
Bhagavad-gita
214
in which people strive for wealth, pleasure, and material goals. 
However, those who become associated with tamas fall from even 
this position and come to exist amongst the lowest of humanity 
or even in the animal forms of life.
Verse 17 again associates sattva with jñana. We are aware that 
all three of the gunas are regarded as causes of bondage but the 
indication seems to be that the pursuit of moksha must begin 
from the platform of sattva. So sattva is not liberating in itself 
but it is the purest of the three gunas and hence it is the position 
one must aspire after as a basis for the moksha dharma. This point 
will become more apparent in Chapter 16 in which qualities 
that are akin to those here connected to sattva are indicated 
as leading to moksha. It would not be correct to assert on the 
basis of this chapter that the human attributes associated with 
sattva are all worthless because they cause bondage and repeated 
birth and death. Such attributes are to be cultivated but then 
ultimately transcended.
The basic instruction of this chapter is that those who develop 
the qualities associated with sattva acquire the good karma that 
leads to a favourable rebirth, those who adhere to rajas remain 
in this world of action, desire, and frustration, and those who 
cultivate the attributes of tamas degrade themselves and gradually 
slip away from the human state of existence.
Verses 19–20: Moksha: going beyond the gunas
19.	 When the seer observes that there is no agent of 
action other than the gunas and gains knowledge of 
that which is beyond the gunas, he attains my state 
of being.
20.	 Transcending these three gunas that cause the body to 
exist, the embodied entity is liberated from the misery 
of birth, death, and old age, and attains immortality.
This short passage clearly follows on from the previous instruction 
which related the gunas to the law of karma, and in fact concludes 
Krishna’s teaching on the subject matter of the fourteenth chapter. 
We have just learned that the particular guna with which a person 

--- PAGE 223 ---
Chapter 14
215
becomes predominantly associated dictates the nature of one’s 
next birth – moving upwards, staying in the same position, or 
slipping downwards. To gain liberation from rebirth, however, 
it is necessary to go beyond all three of the gunas, for the Sam-
khya system dictates that moksha means the absolute separation 
of purusha from prakriti. Here again the question arises as to the 
status of the sattvaguna; is it a cause of bondage or is it a step on 
the path to liberation? The implication is that it is a part of this 
world and hence a cause of bondage, but we should be cautious 
about pressing this conclusion too far, and in Chapter 18, we get 
clear indications that this is not the whole picture.
The teaching here is a reassertion of the idea found in Chap-
ter 13. The three gunas are active in the world for they are the 
constituents of prakriti, but the soul is merely an observer who 
is never truly united with prakriti. Liberation from rebirth can 
be attained by realised knowledge of this truth for one then 
exists as purusha alone and leaves behind the influence of all 
three gunas.
Verses 21–25: The characteristics of one 
who has transcended the gunas
21.	 Arjuna said: What are the characteristics of one who 
has transcended these three gunas, O Lord? How does 
he behave? How does he go beyond the three gunas?
22.	 The Lord said: He does not hate illumination, activity, 
or delusion when they appear, Pandava, and neither 
does he long for them when they disappear.
23.	
He remains indifferent, as if undisturbed by the gunas, 
thinking, ‘It is the gunas alone that are active’. He thus 
remains steady and does not waver.
24.	 He is equally disposed in distress and happiness, he is 
self-contained, and he views a lump of earth, a stone, 
and gold as the same. He is firmly resolved and he is 
equally disposed towards those who are dear to him 
and those who are not. Likewise he is equally dis-
posed when criticised or glorified.

--- PAGE 224 ---
Bhagavad-gita
216
25.	 Whether honoured or condemned he is still the same, 
and he is equally disposed towards friends and foes. 
He has abandoned all his worldly endeavours. Such a 
person is said to be beyond the gunas.
Here, we find another passage which describes the characteristics 
of a person who has attained the highest form of spiritual reali-
sation. And just as in Chapter 2, the description is instigated by 
a direct question from Arjuna who seems particularly interested 
in this subject. If we compare this account to those found in 
2.55–72, 6.7–9 and 12.13–19, we will see that Krishna is essen-
tially restating the same ideas regarding the qualities found in 
one who has attained spiritual perfection. Here are some of the 
points we might note.
Arjuna’s question in verse 21 clearly relates to Krishna’s pre-
vious discussion of the person who has transcended the gunas, 
and the account that Krishna gives in response to this inquiry 
relates to a person who is still living in this world. Hence we 
can conclude that the Bhagavad-gita regards moksha as a state of 
being that can be attained whilst still undergoing bodily exist-
ence – the idea of the jivan mukta.
Such a person is wholly indifferent to the fluctuating fortunes 
that beset us whilst we live in this world.
He exists on the level of the soul alone and as such is witness 
to the events of the world but is completely detached from them. 
He never deviates from his understanding: ‘It is the gunas that 
constitute prakriti which are active here, but in my true identity 
I am not involved in that action.’ His indifference to the world 
arises from this realisation.
This indifference is apparent in relation to pleasure and 
pain, to wealth, to other people, to praise and blame, and to 
friends and enemies. Existing only as the witnessing purusha, he 
observes these as they arise in life but he is wholly detached and 
indifferent to them; he feels none of the emotional responses 
that others will undergo as a result of encounters with differ-
ent circumstances.

--- PAGE 225 ---
Chapter 14
217
Verses 26–27: Going beyond the 
gunas through bhakti
26.	 And one who reveres me through undeviating bhakti-
yoga also transcends the gunas and becomes fit to 
attain the state of Brahman.
27.	
For I am the foundation on which the immortal, 
unchanging Brahman exists. I am also the foundation 
of the eternal dharma and of absolute joy.
The chapter concludes rather as it began with a short passage 
that seems somewhat out of line with its central teachings. Here 
again, as in chapters 5 and 6, we have verses appearing at the end 
of a chapter that emphasise the theistic and devotional strands of 
the Gita’s thought, and again some might be tempted to regard 
these as being later additions to the text inserted by a redactor 
who sought to show that this was its principal doctrine. Any such 
theory, however, must remain as unsubstantiated conjecture and 
it could equally be suggested that Krishna himself might want 
to remind his audience of the importance of bhakti, especially at 
a point in his discourse where he has moved on to other topics.
Each of these two verses makes a distinctive point:
Verse 26: Verses 19 and 20 stated that liberation from rebirth 
is attained through knowledge of the distinction between the 
true self and the material embodiment shaped by the gunas. In 
this verse we are reminded of the alternative means of attaining 
this goal through devotion to the Deity, the two paths noted in 
9.14–15 and 12.1–5. This way of bhakti also takes a person beyond 
the gunas to the realm of Brahman.
Verse 27: Here Krishna expands upon the phrase brahma-bhuy-
aya kalpate, used at the end of 26, by explaining that he himself is 
the pratishtha, the basis or foundation, of this Brahman, of dharma, 
and of the pure joy of spiritual realisation. Here we encounter 
the problem of what exactly is meant by Brahman. We will 
recall that in the opening verses of this chapter Brahman was 
described as the great womb into which the Deity injects the 
seed of life, which seemed to indicate that Brahman is prakriti 
or the total material substance. In verse 26, however, Brahman 

--- PAGE 226 ---
Bhagavad-gita
218
was referred to as the state of existence attained by one who goes 
beyond the gunas and due to this proximity one must presume 
that it is in this sense that Brahman is referred to here. Therefore, 
the indication is that the Brahman of the Upanishads is not the 
ultimate form of the divine, above and beyond the personal Deity, 
but rather that the personal Deity is the basis of Brahman, which 
represents his pervasive presence within the world. And here we 
will recall that the same point was made at the start of Chapter 
7 where Krishna compared himself to the thread that acts as the 
pratishtha, the basis, for a string of jewels.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 14
It is the discourse on the nature of the three gunas – sattva, rajas, and 
tamas – that forms the main substance of this chapter as Krishna 
informs us of their nature and of the influence they have in deter-
mining future rebirths. The chapter opens with the revelation 
that Krishna is the Supreme Deity who impregnates the lifeless 
prakriti with sentient beings, and here prakriti is referred to as the 
great Brahman that is Krishna’s womb. The Gita then reveals the 
nature of the three gunas: sattva as purity, goodness, and wisdom; 
rajas as energy, desire, action, and passion; and tamas as darkness, 
ignorance, sloth, and impurity. The extent to which we cultivate 
and cleave to each of these gunas determines the nature of our 
future rebirth; sattva elevates us to a higher state, rajas keeps us 
here in the domain of material endeavour, and tamas carries us 
downwards to lower forms of existence. Only that person who 
transcends all three of the gunas can escape the cycle of rebirth 
and attain the highest spiritual goal. Arjuna then asks about the 
qualities by which such a person can be identified, and Krishna 
explains that it is primarily his indifference to the fluctuating 
fortunes of the world based on his realisation that his true identity 
is not a part of this world. This spiritual state of existence can also 
be attained through devotion to the Supreme Deity, for Krishna 
himself is the ultimate foundation on which everything rests.

--- PAGE 227 ---

219
Chapter 15
A
s we have seen, in this final section of the Gita each 
chapter seems to have its own particular theme, and the 
fifteenth chapter certainly continues this tendency. At the 
end of Chapter 14, Krishna reminded us again that in addition 
to realised knowledge devotion to a personal Deity is another 
means of achieving spiritual perfection. 
It is this idea that is now developed in the fifteenth chapter as 
the text again places its focus on the Supreme Deity who is the 
creator and controller of all things. In Chapters 13 and 14, the 
teachings were primarily concerned with the nature of prakriti, 
including the three gunas, and the spiritual purusha that is the 
transcendent soul in every being. In Chapter 15, a third factor 
is introduced, the Deity who is shown to be above and beyond 
both matter and the individual soul. 
Here then we have what might be referred to as a theistic form 
of Samkhya philosophy that teaches the eternal existence of three 
fundamental principles, prakriti, purusha, and ishvara. This idea is not 
original to the Gita for it is the main theme of the Shvetashvatara 
Upanishad, though there it is Shiva who is named as the Supreme 
Deity. The structure of the chapter rests on these three principles. It 
opens with a discussion of the world as an inverted banyan tree, and 
then considers the transcendent nature of the soul before concluding 
with revelation about the nature of the Deity who is identified as 
Krishna himself. So despite the fact that it has only twenty verses 
and appears to be apart from the Gita’s central discourse, this chapter 
must be regarded as making a vitally important contribution to the 
understanding of the nature of God presented by the text as a whole.

--- PAGE 228 ---
Bhagavad-gita
220
Verses 1–6: The world as an inverted tree
1.	
The Lord said: They speak of an unfading Ashvattha 
tree with its roots above, its branches below, and the 
Vedic hymns as its leaves. One who understands this 
tree has knowledge of the Vedas.
2.	
Its branches spread out above and below, nourished by 
the gunas. The objects of the senses are its shoots. Its 
roots also spread down below into the human domain 
where they become combined with action.
3.	
Its form cannot be identified for it has no end and no 
beginning and no foundation either. Using the sharp 
weapon of detachment, one should cut down this 
firmly-rooted Ashvattha tree.
4.	
One should then seek that position from which, once 
attained, there is no return, thinking, ‘I surrender to 
that original being (purusha) out of whom flowed 
forth the primeval creative impulse.’
5.	
Without pride or folly, overcoming the barrier of 
attachment, constantly absorbed in knowledge of 
the atman, with desires nullified, free from the duality 
identified as pleasure and suffering, those who are 
free of illusion then progress to that changeless state 
of being.
6.	
The sun does not illuminate that place, neither does 
the moon or fire. Having gone there one does not 
return; that is my supreme abode.
The arresting metaphor of the inverted banyan tree is taken 
from Chapter 6 of the Katha Upanishad, and in fact the whole 
of the fifteenth chapter displays a thematic similarity to the sixth 
chapter of the Katha. Here we might note the following points.
The ashvattha or banyan tree symbolises the material domain, 
which has no identifiable end, middle, or beginning.
The hymns of the Vedas that glorify the gods as a part of 
the ritual are here included within that material domain. The 
conclusion therefore is that the ritual karma-kanda section of the 
Vedas is not a part of the path to moksha, a point that is repeatedly 

--- PAGE 229 ---
Chapter 15
221
emphasised by Shankaracharya. The statement of the first verse, 
according to which one who understands this tree understands 
the Veda as well, perhaps matches the idea expressed in 2.46; in 
other words, one who has realised knowledge has no need of 
the Vedic ritual.
The instruction here is that we must try to break free from 
our entanglement within this world by cultivating a mood of 
detachment, as was indicated in verses 7–11 of Chapter 13 and 
verses 22–25 of Chapter 14. Detachment is compared to the axe 
that must be used to cut down the ashvattha tree that is the locus 
of our bondage.
Verses 4 to 6 then discuss the attainment of moksha and the 
nature of that transcendent state of existence. Again we may note 
that whilst verses 3 and 5 emphasise detachment and realisation 
as the means by which one escapes from this world, verse 4 refers 
to surrendering to the adyam purusham, the original person, and 
so we see how the Gita constantly refers to the two principal 
paths to moksha discussed by Krishna at the start of Chapter 12.
All we learn about the spiritual domain is that once the atman 
reaches that position it is never again reborn in this world, and 
that this sphere of existence is illuminated by a spiritual radiance. 
Here, we will recall the statement of Chapter 13 that the jñeya, 
that which is to be known, is the source of light in all luminaries 
and that it is beyond all darkness. Verse 6 is not original to the 
Gita and is taken almost verbatim from the Upanishads (Katha, 
5.15; Mundaka, 2.2.11; and Shvetashvatara, 6.14) 
Verses 7–11: The transmigrating soul
7.	
In the world of living beings (jiva-loka), the eternal 
living element is nothing but a part of me. It draws to 
itself the five senses and the mind, which is the sixth, 
all of which reside in prakriti.
8.	
When the Lord (ishvara) takes on a body and when he 
moves out from it, he holds on to these six and moves 
on in the way the wind carries aromas from their 
original place.

--- PAGE 230 ---
Bhagavad-gita
222
9.	
Presiding over the senses of hearing, sight, touch, taste, 
and smell, as well as the mind, he then experiences 
the objects of the senses.
10.	 Whether he is departing or remaining, or whether 
he is experiencing the world by association with the 
gunas, those who are deluded do not perceive him. 
Those, however, who possess the eye of knowledge 
can perceive him.
11.	 Yogins who pursue their endeavours perceive him situ-
ated within their own being, but those who are unin-
telligent and fail to achieve self-mastery are never able 
to perceive him despite making the endeavour.
After considering the entanglement of the material world and the 
means of escaping from that entanglement, Krishna now moves 
on to discuss the second of the three fundamental principles – 
the individual atman. This passage is quite complex and open to 
a number of different interpretations so we should think about 
it quite carefully. 
The relationship between the soul and supreme deity
In verse 7, Krishna asserts that the jiva-bhuta, the living being, is 
a part of himself, mama … amsha. This statement would tend to 
confirm Ramanuja’s view of limited identity between the soul 
and God (for the part is non-different from the whole and yet 
there is a distinction between them) and to pose some difficulty 
for Madhva’s theology of absolute difference, the dvaita-vada. 
The statement given here tends to confirm and to elucidate the 
passages on the relationship between the Deity and the living 
beings that are to be found at the beginning of Chapter 7 and 
of Chapter 9.
Who or what does the word ishvara refer to in verse 8?
The ideas contained in verses 8–10 would seem to suggest that 
here the word ishvara, which is usually used to designate the 
Deity, refers to the individual soul, the jiva-bhuta of verse 7. This 
is slightly unusual but can probably be explained by the previous 

--- PAGE 231 ---
Chapter 15
223
statement that the jiva is a part of the Deity, and because the 
soul is the controller of the body. In this role as controller, the 
jiva-bhuta or atman utilises the five senses and the mind in order 
to experience prakriti, the domain of matter.
The meaning of the metaphor in verse 8
As the wind moves from one place to another, it carries with it 
the aroma of its previous association. The presence of flowers 
can be experienced within a house where no flowers are present 
because they are growing in a garden outside the window. In the 
same way, the soul carries the impressions of its previous existence 
into a new embodiment. This conforms to the idea of a subtle 
body surrounding the soul as it moves from lifetime to lifetime. 
The soul itself is entirely spiritual and so is always untouched by 
its material surroundings, but the subtle body of mind and senses 
bears the impressions or vasanas or previous experiences, and it 
is by this means that the law of karma is enacted.
How is one able to perceive this ishvara?
In verse 11, Krishna says pashyanti jñana-chakshushah, those who 
have the eye of knowledge can perceive the atman, and in verse 12 
he states that yogins who make the proper endeavour perceive the 
atman within themselves. This would seem to confirm the ideas 
found in Chapter 6 where it was revealed that control of the mind 
and effective practice of meditational yoga allows the adept to 
perceive the spiritual atman within the very core of his own being.
Verses 12–14: The presence of 
god within the world
12.	 The energy emanating from the sun, which illu-
minates the entire universe, and that of the moon 
and fire as well: you should know that energy as 
mine alone.
13.	
Entering into the earth, I sustain the living beings 
through my potency. Becoming the moon, which is 
imbued with liquid potency, I nourish all the plants.

--- PAGE 232 ---
Bhagavad-gita
224
14.	
I become the vaishvanara energy, the digestive heat, 
and in this form reside within the bodies of the 
living beings. By combining with the prana and apana 
breaths, I digest the four types of food.
And now the chapter turns its attention to the third of the three 
principles, the Supreme Deity who is also present within this 
world. Here we might note the following points.
Verse 12 confirms what Krishna said in 13.17, jyotisham api 
taj jyotis: he is the radiance of all luminaries, which was itself a 
quotation from the Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad (4.4.16), and 
builds on the earlier statement that the abode of the Deity is not 
illuminated by sun, moon, or fire (15.6). In other words, the 
radiance that is apparent in this world is a reflection of the glo-
rious radiance of the spirit by which Arjuna was overwhelmed 
in his vision of the vishva-rupa.
It is the Earth that sustains all life, but here we are told that 
the Earth is able to do so only because it is permeated by the 
energy of God. The traditional Indian belief is that plant life is 
nourished by the rays of the moon. Here we are informed that 
as with the earth the sustaining influence of the moon is a result 
of the presence there of the divine potency.
The term vaishvanara has a number of different meanings, but 
the context reveals that here it is used to refer to the fiery ele-
ment present within the stomach that digests the food we eat by 
combining with two of the breaths in the body. Again Krishna 
suggests that this energy is potent because it is a part of the 
energy of God, which sustains and empowers the world that 
exists all around us.
In verses 12 and 13, it is made clear that Krishna’s empowering 
presence in this world is in the form of his divine energy and 
potency, confirming the statement with which the teachings of 
the tenth chapter conclude to the effect that all the glories of this 
world arise from a small part of his potency. So when Krishna 
says that he is present within the body as the vaishvanara energy 
that digests food, we should understand it as reflecting the view 
that the energetic source is present in the energy it emits. It is the 

--- PAGE 233 ---
Chapter 15
225
energy of God that sustains the material world and enables it to 
nurture life, and it is in this sense that God pervades this world.
Verses 15–20: The three eternal principles
15.	
And I am situated in the hearts of all; memory, knowl-
edge, and the loss of knowledge arise from me. It is I 
alone who am to be understood from all the Vedas. I 
am the creator of Vedanta and I alone am the knower 
of the Vedas.
16.	
In the world there are these two purushas, the kshara 
(decaying), and the akshara (non-decaying). The 
kshara is all living beings, whilst that which is situated 
beyond it is referred to as akshara.
17.	
But the highest purusha is different again and is desig-
nated as the paramatman. This is the immutable Lord 
who enters the threefold world and sustains it.
18.	 And because I am beyond the kshara and superior to 
the akshara as well, I am therefore celebrated in both 
general speech and in the Veda as ‘Purushottama’.
19.	
One who is not deluded and knows me thus as puru-
shottama, knows all things. He then worships me with 
his entire existence, O Bharata.
20.	 I have now revealed this most secret of teachings, O 
sinless one. One who comprehends this doctrine is 
wise indeed and has fulfilled all his duties, O Bharata.
The final six verses of the chapter refer directly to the three prin-
ciples discussed above, forming a passage that is very important for 
our understanding of the Gita’s ideas about the nature of God and 
the relationship between God, the soul and the material world. 
Krishna as situated in the hearts of all beings
Here Krishna is again identifying himself with the atman as he 
did in 10.20 and then in 13.2. Where the verse states that he 
is to be understood from all the Vedas, this must surely mean 
the Upanishads, which reveal the truth about the atman and its 
identity with Brahman. This view is confirmed by the reference 

--- PAGE 234 ---
Bhagavad-gita
226
to Vedanta in the final line, for the term Vedanta is often used to 
indicate the Upanishads. Ramanuja, however, suggests that this 
means that where the Vedic hymns glorify Indra, Agni, Varuna, 
or one of the other gods, it is Krishna who is worshipped, for 
he is present within all the gods. Both Ramanuja and Shankara 
accept that the verse confirms the identity of Krishna with the 
atman, but other Vaishnava commentators have suggested that 
here we have another reference to the paramatman form of the 
Deity who accompanies a living being and guides it through 
the process of transmigration. There is a sense here that the 
manifestation of the Deity being referred to is in control of the 
individual being, whereas the atman in this world exists in a state 
of bondage and subjugation. Hence this suggestion is not wholly 
unreasonable and finds confirmation at the end of the Gita in 
verse 61 of the final chapter.
The kshara and the akshara in verse 16
The word kshara literally means subject to change and deteriora-
tion, whilst akshara means the opposite. In other chapters, akshara 
has been used to refer to the spiritual domain in contrast to the 
temporary material manifestations (for example in 8.11, 8.21 and 
12.3). This would suggest that the two purushas discussed here are 
the temporary person who will meet with death, and the eternal 
soul that exists beyond that personality – kshara and akshara. 
The discussion is complicated by the use of the word purusha, 
which, as we have seen, is the usual Samkhya designation for 
the atman or soul. From this perspective, the kshara purusha is the 
soul in a state of bondage experiencing death, and the akshara 
purusha is the liberated soul that does not experience any material 
circumstances. Against this view, one must say that kshara, decay-
ing, linked to purusha, the soul, seems an unusual combination. 
Shankaracharya regards the kshara purusha, which is all living 
beings, as the material embodiment that is subject to decay and 
the akshara purusha as the eternal atman. Ramanujacharya, on the 
other hand, regards both kshara and akshara as referring to the 
atman, the former in a state of bondage, the latter in its liberated 

--- PAGE 235 ---
Chapter 15
227
state. Both interpretations seem equally valid, though one might 
note here the statement of 7.4–5 regarding the para and apara 
prakritis that might be taken as equivalent to this passage. For 
what it is worth, I think I would favour Shankara’s view here, as 
it seems more consistent with the overall teachings of the chapter.
Who or what is the paramatman referred to in verse 17?
The paramatman is specifically mentioned as being ‘different’ (anya) 
from the kshara and the akshara, a statement that clearly implies 
some degree of distinction between the self and God, in contrast 
to the Advaitic notion of absolute identity. This principle is des-
ignated as the uttama purusha so that we now have three purushas: 
the kshara, akshara, and uttama. I would suggest that these three 
are to be identified as matter, the individual soul and the Supreme 
Deity. In verse 18, Krishna identifies himself as this uttama purusha, 
beyond the kshara and the akshara, and as we are fully aware by 
now, for the Gita Krishna himself is the Supreme Deity.
The connection between verse 19 and verse 8 of chapter 10
Both verse 19 of this chapter and verse 8 of Chapter 10 point 
out the connection between spiritual knowledge and religious 
practice, the practice being contingent upon the knowledge. So 
when one understands that Krishna is the Supreme Deity, one 
then engages in acts of devotion of the type mentioned most 
specifically in Chapter 9 (vv. 14 and 26).
A brief summary of the teachings presented in this passage
After revealing himself as the indwelling self who controls and 
guides the living being, Krishna then states that there are two 
types of purusha, one subject to decay and one that is eternally 
unchanging. This could refer either to the material body and the 
soul, or else to the soul in a state of bondage and the liberated 
soul. Beyond these two purushas is the supreme, uttama purusha, 
which is Krishna himself, the Supreme Deity. One who under-
stands Krishna’s status as the Supreme Being worships him in a 
mood of loving devotion.

--- PAGE 236 ---
Bhagavad-gita
228
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 15
Chapter 15 follows the principal doctrine espoused by the 
Shvetashvatara Upanishad, which states that there are three eter-
nal principles: matter, the individual soul, and the Supreme Deity. 
Verses 1–6 speak of the world of matter using the metaphor of the 
inverted banyan tree; one who seeks liberation from rebirth must 
use the weapon of detachment to cut through the entanglement 
of this world and attain the higher domain. 
Verses 7–11 speak of the second principle, the individual soul 
that is a part of the Supreme Deity. The soul is present in this 
world within various forms of material embodiment and trans-
migrates from one form to another carrying with it the latent 
impressions of its sensual perceptions. The practitioner of yoga is 
able to perceive the existence of the soul within his own being, 
but most people remain unaware of its existence. 
Verses 12–15 then discuss the third of the three principles, 
the Supreme Deity who is Krishna himself. It is by means of his 
potency that the sun, the moon and fire give out light and heat; 
it is through him that the earth nourishes and sustains living 
beings, and he is the internal fire that allows the digestion of 
food. He is also present as the soul within the heart of every 
being who is the controller of the passage of life. The final five 
verses provide a distinctive account of the three elements that 
comprise the entirety of material and spiritual existence. 
There are two purushas in this world: (1) the kshara, the person 
who decays and who is all living beings, and (2) the akshara, the 
person who does not decay and is thus in a higher position. Above 
and beyond these two is the Supreme Being, the Deity who is 
Krishna himself and who is the sustaining force that allows the 
world to continue. When one understands this identity of Krishna 
as the controller and the maintainer of the world, one then follows 
the path of bhakti and worships him with devotion.

--- PAGE 237 ---

229
Chapter 16
A
gain we find here that a new chapter brings a new topic 
for discussion as is typical of this final phase of the Bhaga-
vad-gita. Here Krishna’s theme is the daivi sampad, the 
characteristic qualities of righteous persons, and the asuri sampad, 
the characteristic qualities of the wicked. In fact, most of the 
chapter deals with the latter topic, explaining the mentality of 
wicked persons and also the fate that awaits them after death. Lit-
erally, daivi sampad means ‘the nature of the gods’, and asuri sampad 
means ‘the nature of the asuras’, who are the evil adversaries of the 
gods in the tales of the Puranas. However, the teachings appear 
to refer to persons of this world and their differing mentalities. 
One’s attention is also drawn again to the Mahabharata narrative 
and to the conduct of the righteous Pandavas and the iniquitous 
Kauravas. In fact, one might interpret the teachings here as being 
a direct commentary on the two, particularly as the Mahabharata 
reveals that the Kauravas are asuras who have been born in this 
world, whilst the Pandavas are earthly manifestations of the gods.
Verses 1–6: The daivi sampad and the asuri sampad
1.	
Fearlessness, being pure at heart, remaining resolute 
in the pursuit of knowledge through yoga practice, 
charity, self-control, performing sacrifices, study of the 
Vedas, austerity, honesty;
2.	
Not harming, truthfulness, avoiding anger, renuncia-
tion, tranquillity, never maligning others, compassion 
for other beings, being free of greed, kindness, mod-
esty, never wavering;

--- PAGE 238 ---
Bhagavad-gita
230
3.	
Energy, patience, resolve, purity, the absence of 
malice, and of arrogance; these constitute the qual-
ities of one born with the daivi sampad, the godly 
disposition, Bharata.
4.	
Deceit, arrogance, pride, anger, harshness, and igno-
rance are the qualities of one born with the asuri 
sampad, the asuric disposition, Partha.
5.	
The daivi sampad leads to liberation but the asuri 
sampad is regarded as a cause of bondage. Do not 
be concerned, you have been born with the daivi 
sampad, Pandava.
6.	
There are two types of living being in this world, the 
daiva and the asura. I have described the daiva at some 
length so now hear from me about the asura disposi-
tion, Partha.
Here, the first three verses give a list of the qualities that constitute 
the daivi sampad, whilst verse 4 gives a shorter list of the charac-
teristics of the asuri sampad. So in this passage, the Bhagavad-gita 
becomes something of a treatise on morality by defining virtue 
and wickedness under these two headings. The daivi sampad is 
based primarily on the principle of doing what is good to others 
and avoiding the greed and selfishness that lead a person to injure 
those around him. The asuri sampad, by contrast, rests on intense 
arrogance, contempt for others, and a harsh uncaring disposition. 
The idea here is not unusual and is one that would be shared 
by most forms of ethical discourse. There are, however, some 
significant points.
A virtuous and a non-virtuous disposition
Verses 3 and 4 indicate that the qualities a person possesses 
are inherent from birth rather than something one can aspire 
towards. There is a certain tension within Hindu thought over 
the extent of free will, and one may question whether a wicked 
person truly has the capacity to reform himself. The quali-
ties a person possesses are shaped by the activities performed 
in previous lives, which predetermine one’s inherent nature. 

--- PAGE 239 ---
Chapter 16
231
The indication here is that the degree of free will a person has 
in making moral decisions is significantly circumscribed by 
the inherent nature with which he is born. The suggestion 
is that one is born good rather than achieves goodness. This, 
of course, is not the entire picture, and there are numerous 
examples (Valmiki is perhaps the most of obvious of these) 
and passages of teaching that place the emphasis on the other 
side of the debate.
Virtue as a prerequisite for liberation 
The account of the daivi sampad given in the first three verses is 
primarily a list of moral attributes that would seem to approxi-
mate to the nature of the sattvaguna as described in Chapter 14. 
The difference, however, is that Chapter 14 stated that sattvaguna is 
a cause of bondage whilst here we learn that the daivi sampad leads 
to moksha – daivi sampad vimokshaya. Again this is a debate with 
two sides to it, resting on the question of whether morality and 
virtue are the way to attain liberation from rebirth or whether the 
duality of right and wrong is to be wholly transcended. Chapter 
14 suggested that virtue was a manifestation of sattvaguna and so 
not a feature of transcendence, but here an alternative view seems 
to be presented. We will take up this debate again later in the 
Gita’s discourse, but at this stage one might suggest that whilst 
virtue alone is not sufficient to grant moksha it is an essential part 
of the purifying process that allows realised knowledge to appear 
in one’s heart. On the basis of this understanding, it is possible to 
say that attachment to righteous living can be both a feature of 
bondage in this world and also a gateway to the enlightenment 
that brings liberation from rebirth.
Verses 7–18: The asuri sampad,  
the nature of wicked persons
7.	
Asuric persons know nothing about the performance 
of ritual action or about the renunciation of action. 
Neither purity nor good conduct are ever found in 
them, nor indeed is truthfulness.

--- PAGE 240 ---
Bhagavad-gita
232
8.	
They say, ‘The world has no truth to it, it has no abso-
lute basis and no presiding Deity. It comes into being 
without any causal factor. What cause for existence 
can there be apart from sexual desire?’
9.	
Those who have destroyed their own selves and have 
little intelligence adhere to views of this type. Inim-
ical to all, they then engage in cruel deeds and bring 
destruction to the world.
10.	
Pursuing insatiable desires and filled with deceit, pride, 
and passion, due to delusion they adhere rigidly to 
their false conceptions and proceed on the basis of 
impure resolve.
11.	
Right up to the point of death they are beset by lim-
itless anxieties, devoting themselves to the fulfilment 
of sensual desires, convinced there is nothing more 
than that.
12.	
Bound by hundreds of ropes in the form of their 
aspirations, dominated by desire and anger, they accu-
mulate wealth by immoral means in order to fulfil 
their desires.
13.	 ‘I have obtained this much today and I will obtain 
more to satisfy my desire. This much wealth is 
mine now and this much more will come to me in 
the future.
14.	 ‘I have slain this enemy and I will kill the others as 
well. I am the Lord, I am the enjoyer, I am successful, 
powerful, and happy.
15.	 ‘I am wealthy and born into a good family. Who is 
there who can be my equal? I will perform sacrifices, 
I will give charity and thus I will rejoice.’ Such are 
the ideas of those deluded by ignorance.
16.	
Being distracted by so many different notions, entan-
gled in the net of delusion and addicted to the enjoy-
ment of their sensual desires, they fall down into an 
impure state of hell. 
17.	
Being full of self-importance, stubborn, and 

--- PAGE 241 ---
Chapter 16
233
intoxicated by wealth, pride, and passion, they dishon-
estly perform rituals that are yajña in name only, devi-
ating from the prescribed method.
18.	 Absorbing themselves in egotism, strength, arrogance, 
desire, and anger, they display hatred and envy towards 
me, present as I am in their own bodies and in the 
bodies of others as well.
These verses provide an extended psychological insight into 
the nature of persons who are prone to act wickedly and who 
therefore exist within the asuri sampad. Here we might note the 
following points.
The qualities of those who represent the asuri sampad are 
shaped primarily by pride, ambitious desire for material gain, 
a lack of compassion or respect for others, and a harsh, cruel 
disposition. Again one’s mind is drawn back to the Mahabharata 
narrative in which characters such as Duryodhana and Duh-
shasana perfectly represent the type of person being referred 
to here.
Verses 8–11 seem to indicate that there is a connection between 
wicked conduct and an atheistic or even nihilistic view of the 
world. It is suggested that their pride and materialism are based 
on the view that there is no existence apart from this world and 
hence one should abandon moral restraints and focus exclusively 
on self-interest. The concomitant conclusion might therefore 
be that religious believers are more righteous in their conduct 
because they understand the existence of a higher domain and 
their attitudes are shaped by a religious morality. This is an 
interesting point to debate and some might feel that religious 
belief is no guarantee of righteous conduct or that atheism leads 
inevitably to immorality.
In verses 13–15, Krishna uses the first person to express the 
prevailing attitudes of the wicked adherents of the asuri sampad. 
Here we see that it is not so much their lack of religious belief 
that leads to wickedness as their selfish pursuit of material goals. 
They want to be wealthy, powerful, and admired, and they ignore 
all moral constraints in the pursuit of these goals, destroying, or 

--- PAGE 242 ---
harming those who stand in their way without compassion. It 
is this self-absorption and lack of compassion for others that is 
the principal feature of such persons.
In verse 17, we see that wickedness can exist side by side with 
religion or at least the ritualistic aspect of religiosity. Those of 
the asuri sampad may display an outward commitment to religion 
and even be givers of charity, but they do so only to enhance 
their personal prestige. There is no generosity of spirit and no 
real commitment to spirituality; it is all just a vain show that 
will allow such a person to enhance his reputation and flatter 
his vanity.
In verse 18, almost as an aside, Krishna reveals that he is present 
in the bodies of these wrongdoers and in the bodies of others as 
well. Again we might presume that here Krishna is talking about 
characters from the Mahabharata. In different passages, we read of 
how Duryodhana and his party treat Krishna as an enemy, and 
on one occasion try to imprison him, and yet philosophically we 
are also aware that he is their own self. The point is that their 
ardent materialism and cruel pursuit of self-interest blinds them 
to their own true identity.
Verses 19–24: The fate of the 
wickedly and the godly
19.	 Those cruel persons are filled with hatred and are 
the lowest of men. Within the cycle of rebirth, I cast 
such impure beings into asura wombs where they stay 
for ever.
20.	 Entering an asuric womb birth after birth, such fools 
never attain me, Kaunteya, and so they fall down to 
the lowest state of existence.
21.	 This doorway to hell that destroys the soul is three-
fold, consisting of desire, anger, and greed. You should 
therefore renounce these three.
22.	 A man who frees himself from these three gateways of 
tamas, Kaunteya, can act for his own welfare and then 
proceed to the highest abode.

--- PAGE 243 ---
Chapter 16
235
23.	 One who abandons the rules ordained by scripture 
and acts according to his own desire can never attain 
perfection, happiness, or the highest abode.
24.	 Therefore scripture should be your authority in estab-
lishing what should and should not be done. When 
you understand the rules revealed by scripture, you 
can then act in accordance with your duty.
Here, the discourse moves away from a description of the nature 
of those who fall under the asuri sampad to an account of the fate 
they will undergo in the world to come. Most if not all of the 
world’s religions contain some teaching to the effect that good 
conduct will be rewarded in the afterlife while the wicked will 
have to suffer some form of retribution for their misdeeds. Indian 
religion usually expresses this in the form of the doctrine of 
karma, and it is this idea that is being referred to here.
Krishna as the righteous judge
In this passage, one is able to notice some differences from the 
doctrine of karma as it is more usually expressed. The main point 
I would note is the role of the Supreme Deity in the suffering that 
comes to those who act wickedly. As it is proclaimed in the Upan-
ishads and elsewhere, the law of karma is usually presented as an 
automatic process by which a person creates his or her own destiny 
through thoughts, words, and deeds. The thoughts we think, the 
words we speak, and the deeds we perform all reshape the subtle, 
psychic identity through which the process of rebirth takes place. 
We become whatever we have made ourselves to be. The idea here, 
however, is rather closer to that of the western religions in which 
a righteous God acts as judge and jury and bestows punishment 
and reward on all people. Here Krishna seems to speak of himself 
in a similar manner as the one who casts (kshipami) the wicked 
ones down into the degraded forms of life.
Is naraka the same as ‘hell’?
Christianity and Islam have both traditionally taught the idea of 
an eternal hell in which sinners (and non-believers) are tortured 

--- PAGE 244 ---
Bhagavad-gita
236
perpetually for all time. This vision naturally raises questions 
about the nature of the God who demands such violent and cruel 
forms of retribution, and many Hindus would feel that their 
own beliefs do not include ideas of this type. As we see here, 
however, Hinduism does indeed contain the idea of hell, and 
the same is true of Buddhism and Jainism. In the Mahabharata 
and the Puranas, we find descriptive accounts of various types 
of hell in which wrongdoers are punished in horrific ways for 
their misdeeds, usually with Yama as the presiding deity who 
oversees these torments. One important difference is that Hindu 
teachings insist that existence in hell is not eternal and that after 
some time, the wrongdoer will be reborn in this world. It is also 
the case that many Hindus do not feel obliged to accept every 
word of their scripture as literal truth, and it is often said that hell 
and heaven are both part of our existence on this earth, where 
we suffer great misery. Hence hell is not to be taken as worlds 
of torment but as the sufferings we must endure in the here and 
now as a result of previous actions.
Righteous conduct as based on one’s dharma
In verses 23 and 24, it is interesting to note that Krishna 
defines wickedness as breaking the rules prescribed by scrip-
ture, the shastra-vidhi, although elsewhere in the Mahabharata, 
he states that dharma cannot be defined in terms of shastric 
rules. Here we must accept that good and bad conduct is 
defined in terms of adherence to the rules presented in the 
Vedic dharma-shastras. Arvind Sharma makes a good point in 
his introduction to The Hindu Gita when he points out that 
Krishna’s teachings are first and foremost designed to persuade 
Arjuna that he should fight. By throwing down his bow and 
refusing to wage war, Arjuna stands in breach of the ksha-
triya-dharma as defined by shastra; therefore, it is natural that 
Krishna should refer to these rules when trying to persuade 
Arjuna to act. This connection between the teachings of the 
scriptures and Arjuna’s duty to act is pointed out very clearly 
in the final verse of the chapter.

--- PAGE 245 ---
Chapter 16
237
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 16
As is usual in this final section of the Bhagavad-gita, Chapter 16 
introduces a subject that is not directly linked to the principal 
lines of discussion followed by the text as a whole. Here we have 
a more or less discrete consideration of the righteous and the 
wicked, with the focus primarily on the characteristics of the 
latter and the fate they will suffer as a result of their misdeeds. 
The chapter opens with a list of most of the qualities we would 
expect to find in a righteous person. This is referred to as the daivi 
sampad, the position of those who are like the gods. This covers 
only the first three verses and from this point onwards the chapter 
is devoted to a consideration of the asuri sampad, the nature of 
those who are wicked and devoid of virtue. It is explained that 
such persons are predominated by a sense of pride, aggression 
towards others, and a total lack of compassion or moral sensitivity. 
Although they may involve themselves in religiosity, they have 
no spiritual sensibilities and their lives are focussed exclusively 
on the selfish acquisition of power, prestige, and wealth. They 
have no consideration for the welfare of others, and if anyone 
becomes their rival or opponent they respond with hatred, scorn, 
and violence. Such persons disregard the moral teachings of the 
scriptures and act on the basis of their own whims and desires. 
We are then informed that despite the success they may achieve 
in materialistic terms, such persons are destined to suffer in the 
world to come as the law of karma inexorably takes effect under 
the direction of Krishna who is the Supreme Deity. Thus the 
wicked will be cast down into the region of hell where they will 
endure suffering as a result of their evil deeds, which brought 
pain, strife, and misery to the world.

--- PAGE 246 ---

--- PAGE 247 ---

239
Chapter 17
T
he seventeenth chapter offers a rather curious mixture of 
ideas but is predominated by the analysis of different aspects 
of life and religious ritual in accordance with the three gunas 
– sattva, rajas, and tamas. Chapter 17 opens with a question from 
Arjuna, which is really a response to Krishna’s previous assertion 
that proper action is that which is in accordance with scriptural 
injunction. Arjuna now asks whether one can pursue a form of 
spirituality that is not regulated by such injunction, but Krishna 
does not really give a direct answer. Rather, he refers the issue to 
the inherent nature of a living being as it is shaped by the predom-
inance of one or other of the three gunas. This initial response to 
the question gives rise to the main line of discussion in the chapter 
as Krishna describes different types of worship, food, Vedic ritual, 
religious austerity, and charity in relation to the three gunas; and 
this line of instruction is continued well into the eighteenth chap-
ter. In Chapter 17, however, we have a pause after verse 22, and 
a short passage of six verses that deals with the religious usage of 
the three sacred words: om, tat, and sat. This passage is perhaps 
comparable to that at the end of Chapter 8, as it seems to come 
out of nowhere and is not obviously connected to the progress 
of the teaching. But for this chapter, the main emphasis is on the 
threefold analysis based on our understanding of the gunas.
Verses 1–4: The significance of faith
1.	
Arjuna said: There are some people who faithfully 
make offerings but ignore scriptural rules. What is their 
status, Krishna? Is it said to be in sattva, rajas, or tamas?

--- PAGE 248 ---
Bhagavad-gita
240
2.	
The Lord said: The faith of embodied beings arises 
from their inherent nature and is of three types. It can 
be based on sattva, rajas, or tamas. Now hear about this.
3.	
For all beings, the faith they have corresponds to their 
nature, Bharata. A person is formed by his faith, for 
the nature of that faith shapes what he is.
4.	
Those who are sattvic make offerings to the gods, 
those dominated by rajas worship yakshas and raksha-
sas, whilst other persons under the influence of tamas 
worship spirits and ghosts.
Arjuna’s question here is a very obvious response to Krishna’s 
concluding words in Chapter 16 where he pointed out that a 
person situated in the daivi sampad must adhere to the teachings of 
the scripture and must therefore perform his prescribed dharmic 
duty, something which Arjuna has shown himself unwilling to 
do. So now Arjuna is asking whether it is acceptable to pursue a 
spiritual path whilst ignoring these rules and regulations relating 
to social order.
What then are we to make of Krishna’s response? It is an inter-
esting question that Arjuna asks, but there does not appear to 
be a direct answer in the verses that follow. Arjuna has referred 
to the people he is asking about as being ‘endowed with faith’, 
and it is this point in particular that Krishna responds to. He is 
stating that faith alone does not guarantee spiritual progression, 
for faith itself is shaped by the guna that predominates a person’s 
character. So the answer Krishna gives is really a negative one 
that confirms the point he made at the end of Chapter 16. This 
hypothetical person may have faith in the path he follows, which 
ignores scriptural injunction, but we should know that faith 
alone is inadequate, for the faith we have is a product of our own 
inner nature and that nature is a product of material tendencies.
I think the point that Krishna is making here is that if we select 
or shape our own spiritual path, then the form of religion we 
create will not be truly spiritual because it will arise from a form 
of faith that is related to gunas. On the other hand, the religion 
prescribed by scripture comes from a higher source untouched 

--- PAGE 249 ---
Chapter 17
241
by the gunas. The latter point is not stated overtly, but I think 
it is implicit in what the Gita is saying here. And we might go 
on to suggest that a logical inference from this teaching is that 
the many forms of religion exist not because God or the sages 
present different ideas but because people are predominated by 
different material qualities and that material identity shapes the 
type of religion they adhere to.
Verses 5–6: Excessive asceticism condemned
5.	
Some people who undertake acts of austerity perform 
ferocious deeds not sanctioned by scripture. They are 
motivated by hypocrisy and egotism, and are beset by 
the power of desire and passion.
6.	
They simply cause the elements of the body to waste 
away and they afflict me as well, for I am also present 
in the body. You should understand them as having 
the conviction of the asura nature.
These two verses seem to serve as an example of the point that 
Krishna has just made. Through his question, Arjuna appeared 
to suggest that the presence of faith legitimated a religion even 
though it was not based on scripture, but Krishna replied that 
faith alone is not a suitable criterion because faith comes in dif-
ferent forms and arises from the material qualities inherent in 
a person’s nature. Here is an example. Some people base their 
religion on extreme asceticism and the mortification of the flesh 
in a manner that ignores the teaching of scripture. Such people 
certainly have faith in their spiritual path but that factor alone 
does not make it legitimate. It is in fact a form of adharma because 
they are predominated by the lower gunas of rajas and tamas, and 
the style of religion they adhere to reflects their inherent nature 
because it is not regulated by the test of scripture.
Verses 7–10: Food in relation to the gunas
7.	
Now the food all beings find pleasing is also of three 
types, as is yajña, austerity, and charity. Listen to this 
analysis of those categories.

--- PAGE 250 ---
Bhagavad-gita
242
8.	
The foods liked by sattvic persons are those that bring 
long life, vigour, strength, and health, and which cause 
happiness and delight. Such foods are very tasty, juicy, 
crisp, and pleasing.
9.	
Foods liked by persons predominated by rajas are 
bitter, sour, salty, very hot, pungent, strong-tasting, 
and burning. Such foods cause suffering, sorrow, and 
ill-health.
10.	 The foods liked by those predominated by tamas are 
generally stale, tasteless, rotten, left by others, dirty, 
and foul.
Having answered Arjuna’s question by making reference to the 
three gunas, Krishna then rather cleverly uses this as a link to a 
further passage of teaching in which he shows how the various 
facets of our lives are all influenced by these gunas, starting with 
the food we eat. It is significant to note that this does not take the 
form of lists of foods that can be eaten and forbidden foods, as is 
found in the Islamic Shariah or the Jewish law. Rather, Krishna 
talks about types of food and leaves it up to the individual to 
make his or her choices. And it is significant that here there is 
no direct prohibition on the eating of meat or even of beef.
The sattvic food is what we might today call the ‘healthy 
option’. It is food that prolongs life and brings good health as 
well as making the body fit, active, and invigorated. The science 
of ayurveda contains a detailed analysis of food types but on the 
basis of what Krishna says here we must presume that fresh fruit 
and vegetables, whole grains, and other forms of light, nutritious 
food can be taken as sattvic. Rajasic foods seem to be those that 
are very strong tasting, salty, and pungent; perhaps in the modern 
supermarket they would be the heavily processed foods that con-
tain unsaturated fats and are hard to fully digest. And finally the 
tamasic foods are those which are really unfit for consumption 
– leftovers and stale or rotten food. The point here, I think, is 
that these are the sort of foods that are eaten by people who are 
negligent and have no concern over what they are putting into 
their body. It is interesting to note that these different types of 

--- PAGE 251 ---
Chapter 17
243
food are referred to as tamasa-priya or sattvika-priya. The type 
of person you are is shaped by the predominance of one of the 
gunas over the others in your psychological and physical make 
up. And the type of person you are dictates the type of food you 
will find attractive; some people like salty, processed food whilst 
others prefer to eat fresh fruit and vegetables. These different 
predilections are symptomatic of the presence of the different 
gunas within different persons.
Verses 11–13: Yajña in relation to the gunas
11.	
When yajña is performed by persons who do not 
desire to gain thereby, in strict accordance with the 
proper rules, and with the mind absorbed in the 
thought, ‘It is my duty to make this offering,’ then it is 
of the nature of sattva.
12.	
But when it is performed with some result in mind 
or out of vanity, O best of the Bharatas, that yajña is of 
the nature of rajas.
13.	
And when it is performed without regard for the 
proper rules, without food offerings, chanting of the 
hymns, payment to the priests, or any real faith in the 
process, they say that yajña is of the nature of tamas.
Now, using the same format, the discussion moves on to a con-
sideration of the Vedic ritual. Here there is an important point 
to note, which gives further insight into our earlier discussion 
of whether the sattvaguna is a cause of bondage or a platform for 
the pusuit of moksha.
How do these verses connect to the  
previous teachings of the Bhagavad-gita?
Here we find that the performance of karma-yoga, as outlined 
in the early chapters of the Gita, is associated with the sattva-
guna. In verse 11, we read that the yajña is sattvic when it is 
performed without any desire for personal gain, simply because 
it is one’s religious duty to do so. And in verse 12, the ritual 
performed with a desire for personal gain is designated as being 

--- PAGE 252 ---
Bhagavad-gita
244
‘of the nature of rajas’. So it seems that karma-yoga is closely 
associated with the quality of sattva, and as we have heard it 
repeatedly said that karma-yoga is a means of gaining liberation 
from rebirth, it seems that sattva can be regarded as a part of 
the path to moksha. We will see this pattern emerging again 
as the text continues to follow this format with sattva being 
equated with desireless action, rajas equated with action based 
on desire, and tamas the negligent, heedless, and inappropriate 
performance of action.
Verses 14–19: Austerity in relation to the gunas
14.	 Austerity of the body is said to consist of worship of 
the gods, brahmins, teachers, and wise men, cleanliness, 
honesty, celibacy, and not harming (ahimsa).
15.	
Austerity of speech is said to consist of speaking words 
that do not disturb others and which are true, loving, 
and beneficial, as well as the regular recitation of 
the Vedas.
16.	 And austerity of the mind is said to consist of mental 
serenity, benevolence, silence, self-control, and a 
pure disposition.
17.	
When men engaged in yoga undertake this threefold 
austerity with the highest faith and without desire 
for any result, that austerity is said to be of the nature 
of sattva.
18.	
But when the austerity is undertaken for the sake 
of gaining respect, reputation, and honour, or out of 
vanity, it is said to be of the nature of rajas; this indeed 
is unstable and impermanent.
19.	 And that austerity by which one inflicts pain on one-
self due to foolish notions, or which is intended to 
bring destruction to others, is declared to be of the 
nature of tamas.
Here Krishna moves on to the third of the four topics he reviews 
in this chapter in relation to the gunas. This is tapas, or religious 
austerity, and we might note the following points.

--- PAGE 253 ---
Chapter 17
245
At the beginning of the chapter, Krishna was very critical of 
persons who undertake harsh austerities that can harm the body, 
pointing out that this type of religious practice is not recom-
mended in the scriptures. And here that same theme is continued 
as tapas is first defined in a rather novel manner. In the Ramayana, 
Mahabharata, and Puranas, we read of tapas being performed by 
holy men living in the forest, and this typically takes the form of 
some form of severe restraint of eating, drinking, or breathing, 
or even the adoption of painful bodily postures and exposing 
oneself to severe heat and cold. Here, however, Krishna defines 
tapas in a rather different manner that makes its practice possible 
for people in all stages of life.
Tapas is defined in two ways, both of which have three divi-
sions: firstly in terms of body, speech, and mind, and then in 
terms of the three gunas. Where tapas is related to body, speech, 
and mind, it is quite clear that the practice spoken of here is 
very different from the harsh mortification of the flesh we read 
of in the Puranas. Bodily tapas consists of showing respect to 
those worthy of it, cleanliness, honesty, sexual restraint and not 
harming others. Austerity of speech means to speak only the truth 
or words that are pleasing, to not cause pain to anyone, and to 
recite sacred texts. And austerity of the mind means to remain 
peaceful and to have a kind, gentle, and benevolent attitude 
towards others. So apart from anything else, Krishna is offering 
something of a redefinition of tapas that moves it away from the 
harsh physical austerity more usually associated with the term.
In the second threefold definition of tapas, which is based on the 
gunas, we see again how sattva is associated with karma-yoga, and 
rajas with the pursuit of selfish desire. Furthermore, the statement of 
verse 17 that the three types of austerity are undertaken by men who 
are yukta, or engaged in yoga, also suggests a connection between 
sattva and the spiritual path that leads to liberation from rebirth.
Verses 20–22: Charity in relation to the gunas
20.	 Charity given with the thought, ‘This should be 
given’, presented to a suitable recipient from whom 

--- PAGE 254 ---
Bhagavad-gita
246
nothing is expected in return, and at the right time 
and place, is of the nature of sattva.
21.	
But that charity which is given with the expecta-
tion of getting something in return, with the hope 
of some future reward, or with reluctance is of the 
nature of rajas.
22.	 And that charity which is given at the wrong place 
and wrong time, to an unworthy recipient, or which 
is given without respect and with contempt, is known 
to be of the nature of tamas.
In the final section of this passage, the same threefold analysis 
is applied to the giving of gifts in charity. Again we may note 
the link that is drawn between the absence of selfish desire, 
karma-yoga, and the prevalence of sattva in the performance of 
the action. Apart from the absence of desire for something in 
return or for personal prestige, in sattvic charity there is also the 
question of the gift being given to a ‘suitable recipient’. Who 
is this suitable person? Some will suggest that this implies that 
charity should only be given to brahmins, religious institutions 
or to persons who are righteous, and not to those who might 
use the gift to purchase alcohol or drugs. This may well be what 
Krishna is meaning here but the statement is not explicit. One 
might equally regard the ‘suitable recipient’ as a person who is 
starving and whose life depends on the gift we might give.
Verses 23–28: The sacred words ‘om tat sat’
23.	 The words om tat sat are understood as a threefold 
designation of Brahman. It was with this mantra that 
the brahmins, Vedas, and yajñas were established in 
ancient times.
24.	 Therefore, in accordance with the prescribed rule, 
the followers of the Veda always recite the syllable 
om when they perform ritual acts of yajña, charity, 
and austerity.
25.	 Without desire for the fruit of their action, persons 
who seek liberation from rebirth recite the syllable tat 

--- PAGE 255 ---
Chapter 17
247
when they perform various ritual acts of yajña, auster-
ity, and charity.
26.	 This term sat is used to designate both reality and 
virtue. The word sat is also used to denote a righteous 
act, Partha.
27.	
Hence dedication to yajña, austerity or charity is 
referred to as sat; the action by which these are under-
taken is also designated as sat.
28.	 However, if an act is performed without faith, be it a 
sacrificial offering, a gift in charity or an act of aus-
terity, it is referred to as a-sat, Partha. It has no effect 
either in the world to come or here in this world.
This passage marks a sudden change in the direction of the dis-
course that is really quite surprising. There is a link however. The 
previous verses have reviewed the different types of yajña, tapas, 
and dana, which are religious acts typically performed within 
the Hindu tradition. Here Krishna elaborates further on these 
rituals by explaining that when they are performed, the sacred 
words om, tat, and sat are enunciated to enhance their sanctity. 
Here, we might note the following points.
There is much that could be said here on the Upanishadic 
references to the words om, tat, and sat, but such a detailed study 
would be beyond our scope. Suffice to say that here again the 
Bhagavad-gita is closely connected to the religious ideas espoused 
by the major Upanishads and in particular the statement of the 
Mandukya Upanishad that om is brahman, as repeated here in 
verse 23.
Verses 24–27 seem merely to point out that each of the three 
words om, tat, and sat is used as an invocation when the rituals 
of yajña, tapas, and dana are performed.
In verse 28, Krishna returns again to the issue of faith that was 
raised by Arjuna in the question with which the chapter began. 
In his initial response, Krishna pointed out that faith is not nec-
essarily a positive quality, for it is of different kinds as shaped by 
the gunas, and a person who is not guided by the scriptures may 
have faith in a form of religion that is wholly pernicious.

--- PAGE 256 ---
Bhagavad-gita
248
Here, however, the other side of the argument is presented as 
we are told that any religious act must be accompanied by faith 
if it is to be efficacious. Otherwise, it will be like the rajasic 
and tamasic rituals referred to above that are undertaken just 
to enhance a person’s prestige, or negligently, and without any 
real commitment.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 17
Chapter 17 of the Bhagavad-gita opens with Arjuna’s question 
as to whether religious actions that ignore scriptural injunction 
are still valid if they are performed with faith. To this, Krishna 
replies that faith alone is not enough, for one’s faith is shaped by 
one’s inner nature and can in fact lead one to follow pernicious 
forms of religion. The discussion was then extended to reflect 
firstly on food, and then on three types of religious action, Vedic 
ritual, religious austerity, and charity – yajña, tapas, and dana. 
Krishna pointed out that these can be undertaken in different 
ways depending upon the predominance of a particular guna: 
sattva, rajas, or tamas. The idea implied here is that a ritual act may 
be performed with faith, but if that faith is a product of rajas or 
tamas then the ritual will be characterised by the flaws referred 
to in these verses. The chapter concludes with a brief discussion 
of the sacred words, or mantras, enunciated whilst the ritual acts 
of yajña, tapas, and dana are performed, and a statement that 
although faith alone may be not be enough, it is still an essential 
requirement if the ritual is to be properly executed.

--- PAGE 257 ---

249
Chapter 18
C
hapter 18 is the final chapter of the Bhagavad-gita and 
it is also the longest, containing a total of 78 verses. The 
content of the chapter can be divided into three parts. The 
first phase of the teaching extends from verse 1 to verse 39 and 
continues and expands upon the discussion begun in Chapter 
17. Here we find further reflection on the ritual performance of 
yajña, tapas, and dana and in particular the question of when and 
if such acts are to be given up so that the aspirant can seek the 
ultimate goal of moksha. 
After a detailed consideration of the nature of action and its 
results, the Gita then resumes its analysis of different aspects of our 
existence in relation to the three gunas. Here the discussion focuses 
on six topics to add to the four covered in Chapter 17. These are 
knowledge, action, the performer of action, intelligence, resolve, 
and happiness. This discourse continues up to verse 39 and at this 
point Krishna begins to conclude his instructions by recapitulating 
and summarising the main points he has sought to convey to Arjuna, 
and it is notable that the three topics he particularly highlights are 
karma-yoga, the realisation of spiritual knowledge, and finally the 
path of bhakti (which is particularly emphasised here). 
The third and final part of the chapter forms a conclusion to 
the Bhagavad-gita as a whole. Krishna warns that this teaching 
should not be given to an unsuitable person but to those who are 
receptive. Arjuna then confirms that his mind has been changed 
by the words Krishna has spoken, and the vision he has seen. 
He will now take up his bow once more and fight in the battle. 
The final verses return to the original setting in Chapter 1, with 

--- PAGE 258 ---
Bhagavad-gita
250
Samjaya emphasising to Dhritarashtra that the presence of Arjuna 
and Krishna means that victory is certain for the Pandava cause.
Verses 1–6: Samnyasa and tyaga – 
Two types of renunciation
1.	
Arjuna said: I wish now to learn about the subject 
of samnyasa, O mighty Hrishikesha, and about the 
distinction between samnyasa and tyaga, O slayer 
of Keshin.
2.	
The Lord said: Learned men understand samnyasa to 
be the giving up of any action motivated by selfish 
desire. The wise further define tyaga as the renuncia-
tion of the fruits of all action.
3.	
Some of those endowed with wisdom assert that all 
action must be abandoned because it is inherently 
flawed. But others say that ritual acts of yajña, charity, 
and austerity must not be abandoned.
4.	
Now hear my verdict on this debate over renuncia-
tion, O best of the Bharatas. It has been asserted that 
renunciation is of three types, O tiger amongst men.
5.	
The ritual acts of yajña, charity, and austerity must 
not be abandoned. Rather they should be performed, 
for yajña, charity, and austerity can purify even men 
of wisdom.
6.	
But even these types of action should be performed only 
after renouncing attachment to them and the reward 
they bring. This is my ultimate conclusion, Partha.
Arjuna’s question here might seem to be a complete change of 
subject for the words samnyasa and tyaga both mean ‘giving up’ or 
‘renunciation’, and are often used in relation to the renunciation 
of the world by sages and sadhus who wish to live as monks in 
pursuit of exclusively spiritual goals. The question arises, however, 
from the previous discussion of religious action – yajña, tapas, and 
dana – for renunciation includes the giving up of these ritual-
ised forms of religion. Hence Arjuna is asking here whether the 
practices considered in Chapter 17 are just preliminary forms of 

--- PAGE 259 ---
Chapter 18
251
religious action that are to be given up when a person progresses 
to the higher levels of spiritual realisation. Krishna concedes 
that even amongst the wise there are different opinions on this 
subject, but then gives his own decision that corresponds with 
his earlier insistence that Arjuna must fulfil his dharmic duty.
How does Krishna distinguish samnyasa and tyaga?
Krishna defines samnyasa as the complete renunciation of ritual 
action, and here one must presume he is referring to the ancient 
institution by which a brahmin renounces the world in later 
life to become a samnyasin. For most of his life the brahmin is 
a performer of rituals, but when he takes the vows of samnyasa 
he gives up these practices, living apart from society and seek-
ing only spiritual realisation. Tyaga is here equated with the 
karma-yoga that Krishna discussed in the earlier chapters of the 
Bhagavad-gita. Here ritual action is still performed, but there is a 
process of buddhi-yoga, the internal renunciation of attachment to 
the result of the action. So here complete renunciation of action 
is designated as samnyasa, and the renunciation of selfish desire 
whilst one continues to perform action as a duty is referred to 
as tyaga, seemingly a synonym for karma-yoga. The distinction 
between the two terms made here seems to be unique to the 
Bhagavad-gita and is not replicated (as far as I am aware) in the 
use of the terms in other Sanskrit texts.
Is ritual action is to be given up?
As is to be expected, Krishna gives the decision that tyaga, renun-
ciation of attachment to results, is superior to samnyasa, the 
complete renunciation of ritual action. This corresponds with 
the teachings given at the start of Chapter 3 in which complete 
renunciation of action was condemned as being impossible to 
achieve and useless without internal renunciation of desire.
The reason Krishna gives for this verdict is however rather 
different to that stated in Chapter 3. In verse 5, Krishna states 
that the ritual performance of yajña, tapas, and dana (as described 
in the previous chapter) is effective in purifying a person and the 

--- PAGE 260 ---
Bhagavad-gita
252
implication seems to be that spiritual realisation can only appear 
in the heart of one who has attained this position of purity. For 
this reason, ritualised forms of religious practice are not to be 
given up; karma-yoga is again given precedence over the complete 
renunciation of the world.
Verses 7–12: Renunciation in relation to the gunas
7.	
The renunciation of prescribed action is improper. 
The renunciation of such action due to ignorance is 
proclaimed to be of the nature of tamas.
8.	
If action is given up as painful and because of fear of 
the suffering it might cause to one’s body, that renun-
ciation is of the nature of rajas; one will not gain the 
fruit of renunciation in that way.
9.	
But if one thinks, ‘This must be performed’ and 
then discharges his prescribed duty whilst renounc-
ing attachment and the fruits of action, Arjuna, that 
renunciation is known to be of the nature of sattva.
10.	 The renouncer who is predominated by sattva never 
loathes action when it is not pleasing and is not 
attached to pleasant action. He is a wise man and his 
doubts are dispelled.
11.	
It is impossible for any being who has a body to com-
pletely give up action, but one who renounces the 
fruits of action is said to be tyagin, a true renouncer. 
12.	
Undesirable, desirable, and mixed are the three types 
of result that come from action. After death these 
befall those who are not renouncers, but never those 
who are renounced (tyagins).
This passage gives further discussion of the subject of renunciation 
and here Krishna employs his usual tool of analysis by looking at 
the subject in terms of the three gunas. Renunciation, like faith, 
is not necessarily something positive for it can be a result of the 
lower gunas, rajas, and tamas. Where tamas prevails, renunciation 
may occur as a result of laziness, stupidity, or confusion; and 
where rajas prevails, a person may follow the path of renunciation 

--- PAGE 261 ---
Chapter 18
253
because he finds his dharmic duty difficult or painful – an asser-
tion that has resonance with Arjuna’s current position.
In verses 9 and 10, we have the by now familiar equation of 
the sattvaguna with karma-yoga, for when action is performed 
purely as a matter of duty without any selfish intent then this 
is the sattvic form of renunciation. Verse 11 repeats the point 
made in 3.5 that the complete renunciation of all action is an 
impossibility, for to live is to act. Hence real renunciation is not 
so much about physical action but an internal state of conscious-
ness. And according to verse 12, one who attains this state of 
renounced consciousness whilst continuing to perform action is 
not afflicted by the effects of action in accordance with the law 
of karma. So here again we see an equation made between the 
sattvaguna and the karma-yoga and then between karma-yoga and 
liberation from the bondage of karma.
Verses 13–18: Five causes of the results of action
13.	
Now learn from me about these five causal factors, 
O mighty one, established by the Samkhya system as 
determining the results of all actions.
14.	 These are the situation, the performer, the various 
instruments employed, and the different motions 
enacted. Destiny is then the fifth factor.
15.	
Whatever action is undertaken with body, words, or 
mind, be it proper or perverse, these five are its causes.
16.	 As this is the case, anyone who due to an undeveloped 
understanding sees himself alone as the performer of 
action has the wrong idea and does not see at all.
17.	
If a person has no sense of being the performer of 
action and if his consciousness is not absorbed in the 
action, then even if he kills all these people he does 
not kill and he is not bound.
18.	
Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower 
represent the threefold impulse for action. The instru-
ment, the deed, and the performer represent the three 
constituents of an action.

--- PAGE 262 ---
Bhagavad-gita
254
These six verses contain a succinct discourse on the nature and 
performance of action, and despite their brevity they offer a 
number of important insights into a variety of subjects. The 
opening passages of this chapter have been focused on the issue 
of whether ritual action is to be performed or whether it should 
be renounced by one seeking to escape from the bondage of 
karma, and these verses continue to explore the same subject. 
Here we might note the following points.
Five factors are here identified as being instrumental in deter-
mining the outcome of any action. These are the place, the 
performer, the instruments, the exertion made, and finally destiny. 
It is interesting to note here that this teaching does not accept 
a doctrine of absolute determinism as sometimes appears to be 
the case in Hindu religious thought. It might be argued that 
because the course of our life is predetermined on the basis of 
the law of karma, our personal endeavours are not important in 
determining success or failure. Here, however, a different view 
is expressed, for four of the five factors listed are to do with the 
way we perform an action, in other words personal endeavor, and 
destiny, shaped by past action, is only one factor of five. Hence 
we might conclude that the outcome of any undertaking will 
be determined by a subtle combination of the efficacy of the 
endeavour and the destiny imposed upon us by our previous acts.
The main idea in this passage, however, is related again to 
karma-yoga and here a direct link is drawn between karma-yoga 
and realisation of the true self. The detachment from selfish 
desire that is the central feature of karma-yoga becomes possible 
as a result of the realisation that the true self is not affected 
by action and is not the performer of action. Here five fac-
tors were listed but the atman, our own true identity, is not 
one of them. Hence realised knowledge and detachment from 
the fruits of action are concomitant factors in the progress of 
spiritual awakening.
Verse 17 has given rise to some controversy because it seems 
to suggest that if one’s motive is pure or is unselfish, then even 
an action that appears overtly wicked does not leave one morally 

--- PAGE 263 ---
Chapter 18
255
culpable or subject to negative karma. There is no doubt that 
the Bhagavad-gita moves the focus of moral judgement away 
from the nature of the action itself and on to the motive which 
prompts one to perform the action. That is not to say, however, 
that the Gita is indifferent to the nature of the action itself, for 
karma-yoga insists that it should be action in accordance with 
dharma that is performed without desire. However, because it is 
very difficult to determine what a person’s motive is, this verse 
could give support to the type of political or religious fanaticism 
that produces acts of extreme violence and claims a moral basis 
for them on the grounds that they are not selfishly motivated. 
This could even be applied to any doctrine of a ‘just war’, for 
nations that engage in violent confrontations typically difficult 
to demonstrate the falsity of such a claim. It is more or less on 
this basis that some modern writers have been critical of the 
morality of the Gita and accused the text of giving ideological 
support to warmongers. Here, however, Gandhi’s comments 
on the Bhagavad-gita provide a useful sense of balance, for he 
argues that the Gita only gives legitimacy to acts of violence 
when they are performed by one who is wholly free of selfish 
desire and has no sense of enmity towards any other being. Now 
some may abuse this doctrine to justify their acts of cruelty but 
such misuse of an idea does not necessarily invalidate a doctrine 
or teaching. The point is that this verse and similar ideas found 
in the Gita must be understood strictly within the context of 
the teachings of the text as a whole, and not extracted from it 
without wider understanding.
Verses 19–22: Knowledge in relation to the gunas
19.	
Knowledge, action, and the performer of action are all 
threefold according to the gunas. This can be shown 
by analysis in relation to the gunas, so now listen to 
the way these are arranged.
20.	 When one changeless existence is seen in all beings, 
undivided in their diverse forms, you should know 
that knowledge to be of the nature of sattva.

--- PAGE 264 ---
Bhagavad-gita
256
21.	
But when knowledge displays an understanding based 
on distinction, and recognises varying types of exis-
tence in different living beings, you should know that 
knowledge to be of the nature of rajas.
22.	 And that knowledge which is not based on reason, 
which attaches itself to a single causal factor as if it 
were everything, which is unaware of the truth and 
thus limited in scope, is regarded as being of the 
nature of tamas.
After the extended consideration of the nature of action, which 
arose from Arjuna’s question about the renunciation of action, 
Krishna now returns to the pattern of teaching he began in 
Chapter 17, using the three gunas as a basis for analysing dif-
ferent aspects of human life. Here, he moves beyond the three 
types of religious ritual discussed above (yajña, tapas, and dana) 
and considers firstly knowledge, then action itself, and then the 
performer of action. 
Three types of knowledge
Sattvic knowledge is that which perceives the single reality exist-
ing within every being rather than the diversity of existence in 
terms of the material forms. There is more than a hint of Advaita 
in this verse but this is not the only possible explanation, for it 
could be that the sattvic knowledge perceives an identical atman 
in every being without seeing each atman as identical with Brah-
man. And once again we see the direct relationship that exists 
between the quality of sattva and spiritual realisation.
Rajasic knowledge does not perceive the spiritual reality 
existing within each being but sees only the external mundane 
world. In other words, knowledge related to sattva is equated 
with spiritual insight whilst rajasic knowledge is confined to that 
which can be perceived through the senses.
Knowledge related to tamas appears to be the sort of mindless 
fanaticism that is beyond the call of reason, or else just plain 
stupidity. Unfortunately, this type of knowledge seems to be 
quite widespread in contemporary society.

--- PAGE 265 ---
Chapter 18
257
Verses 23–25: Action in relation to the gunas
23.	 Action that is ordained, performed without attach-
ment, and undertaken without passionate endeavour, 
hatred, or desire for the fruits, is said to be of the 
nature of sattva.
24.	 But action performed due to hankering for a 
desired object, with a sense of pride, or with exces-
sive endeavour, is regarded as being of the nature 
of rajas.
25.	 And action undertaken due to delusion and without 
regard for consequences, damage, harm, and ability, is 
said to be of the nature of tamas.
Verse 18 above pointed out that knowledge, its object and the 
knower provide the impulse for action, for action is usually predi-
cated by thought and perception. So different types of knowledge 
give rise to different types of action in accordance with the gunas, 
and these three types of action are delineated here.
Three types of action
Sattvic action is again clearly equated with the Gita’s doctrine of 
karma-yoga. When action is in accordance with dharma, and when 
it is performed dispassionately, as a duty, then it is of the nature 
of sattva. Action performed on the basis of personal desire or out 
of a sense of pride is of the nature of rajas, and tamasic action is 
the sort of stupid, callous, or cruel action that is frequently seen 
to occur simply because of the degraded nature of the person 
who performs it. In all three instances, we can certainly think 
of examples in the world today when action of this type is seen 
to be performed.
Verses 26–28: The performer of action 
in relation to the gunas
26.	 When he is free of attachment, never speaks with any 
sense of ‘I’, is endowed with resolve and fortitude, and 
is unmoved by success or failure, the performer of 
action is said to be of the nature of sattva.

--- PAGE 266 ---
Bhagavad-gita
258
27.	
But if he is desirous and seeks the fruit of action, is 
greedy, violent by nature, and impure, and is beset 
by feelings of delight and sorrow, that performer of 
action is regarded as being of the nature of rajas.
28.	 And that performer of action who is negligent, vulgar, 
obstinate, deceitful, vicious, indolent, uninspired, and 
procrastinating is said to be of the nature of tamas.
In the third of this set of passages, Krishna considers the nature 
of the performer of action in relation to the three gunas and here 
the pattern is very similar to that noted above in relation to the 
action itself, with a further affirmation of the close link between 
karma-yoga and sattvaguna.
Three types of actor
When the performer of action is influenced by sattva, he acts 
without attachment to the results, with firm resolve and with no 
sense of pride in his achievements. When the performer is influ-
enced by rajas, he is aggressive and passionate and has an ardent 
desire for personal gain through his endeavours. But where tamas 
predominates, the performer of action is lazy, stupid, obstinate, 
and unmotivated. 
Verses 29–32: Intelligence in 
relation to the gunas
29.	 Now hear about the threefold divisions of intelligence 
and of resolve in relation to the gunas, which I shall 
fully explain to show the differences between them, 
Dhanamjaya.
30.	 That which understands prescribed action and the 
renunciation of action, what should be done and what 
should not be done, what is to be feared and what is 
not to be feared, as well as bondage and liberation, is 
intelligence under the influence of sattva.
31.	
But that by which dharma and adharma are not clearly 
understood, nor indeed ordained duty and forbidden 
action, is intelligence under the influence of rajas, Partha.

--- PAGE 267 ---
Chapter 18
259
32.	
But that understanding which is covered by ignorance 
and so thinks adharma to be dharma, and has wrong 
conceptions on all subjects, is intelligence under the 
influence of tamas.
At this point, the discourse changes direction slightly as Krishna 
moves his analysis away from the performance of action to con-
sider the nature of our intelligence or, perhaps more precisely, 
the way in which we understand the world. The points made 
here may seem obvious, but if we think about them carefully 
they contain some very profound truths. The focus of this pas-
sage is on the ways in which people understand dharma, and 
here I think we should interpret dharma in the broadest sense as 
‘righteous conduct’. 
People all over the world claim to be acting righteously, but 
here the Bhagavad-gita points out that understandings of dharma 
are shaped by the predominance of a particular guna. So if a 
person is dominated by the quality of rajas, he may claim to be 
acting on the basis of virtue, or dharma, but his inherently rajasic 
nature means that his intelligence is incapable of understanding 
what virtue truly is. At a less philosophical level, we might say that 
people motivated by strong personal desires frequently construct 
a definition of virtue that is, in fact, no more than a justification 
for their own self-interest, and they are often deluded by their 
own moral inventions. It is only the sattvic person who is able 
to withdraw from the predominance of self-interest and thereby 
perceive the true nature of virtue and of dharma.
Three types of understanding
Where the intelligence is predominated by sattva, a person has a 
clear understanding of the world and can distinguish between 
right and wrong, and between proper and improper conduct. 
He also possesses the spiritual insight to determine how liber-
ation can be attained, as well as the root causes of our bondage 
in this world. By contrast, where rajas prevails, a person cannot 
understand what is dharma and what is adharma, or what course 
of action is moral and what is immoral. Here one may note that 

--- PAGE 268 ---
Bhagavad-gita
260
the rajasic person is dominated by his selfish desires and it is 
this ardour for personal gain that obscures his understanding of 
dharma. Where the intellect is under the sway of tamas, a person 
regards wickedness as virtue and virtue as wickedness. We might 
think that this must be an extreme circumstance but again if 
we consider the world around us we will see that this type of 
tamasic understanding is depressingly prevalent.
Verses 33–35: Resolve in relation to the gunas
33.	
That resolve by means of which one holds the activ-
ities of the mind, breath, and senses in undeviating 
yoga practice is of the nature of sattva.
34.	
But that resolve by which a person adheres to the 
goals of dharma, kama, and artha, seeking results from 
each of these attachments, is of the nature of rajas.
35.	
And that resolve due to which a man with perverse 
ideas does not give up sleep, fear, grief, depression, and 
vanity is of the nature of tamas.
In the fifth of these six passages, Krishna turns his attention to 
the subject of dhriti, which can be translated as ‘resolve’, ‘com-
mitment’, or ‘determination’. As with faith, all people display 
some form of resolve but here we are shown that the object of 
that commitment is determined by the way in which the gunas 
shape our inherent nature.
Three types of resolve
Although the point has probably been over-emphasised by now, 
it is still noteworthy that the analysis here again links sattva 
with the spiritual quest for liberation. Hindu teachings typi-
cally refer to four goals of life, dharma, artha, kama, and moksha 
– religion or virtue, wealth, fulfilment of desire, and liberation 
from rebirth – and these are used here for the purposes of 
analysis. The pursuit of moksha is found where one’s dhriti is 
applied to the regulation of the mind through yoga practice, 
the techniques Krishna revealed in Chapter 6 as a means of 
acquiring realised knowledge. Dharma, artha, and kama are the 

--- PAGE 269 ---
Chapter 18
261
goals sought where dhriti is predominated by the quality of rajas, 
and where a person has no clear goal to pursue, but is under 
the control of indolence, misery, and intoxication, the dhriti is 
regarded as being tamasic.
Verses 36–39: Happiness in relation to the gunas
36.	
Happiness is also of three types. Now hear from me, 
O best of the Bharatas, about the happiness a person 
finds due to his repeated practice, which puts an end 
to sorrow.
37.	
That which is like poison in the beginning but at the 
end is like nectar is said to be happiness of the nature 
of sattva. It arises due to the serenity of one’s intellect.
38.	
But that happiness which is obtained through the 
contact of the senses with their objects, and is like 
nectar in the beginning but like poison in the end, is 
understood to be of the nature of rajas.
39.	 And that happiness which simply deludes the self in 
both the beginning and the end, being based on sleep, 
indolence, and stupidity, is of the nature of tamas.
In the last of the six passages, Krishna turns his attention to the 
pursuit of happiness, which is also defined in relation to sattva, 
rajas, and tamas.
Three types of happiness
Where sattva prevails, it is understood that true happiness can 
only be gained through considerable endeavour and sacrifice, 
whilst the happiness of rajas is instant gratification of the type 
that ultimately leads to suffering. It is fairly easy to infer here that 
the notion of sattvic happiness relates to the spiritual joy that is 
ultimately achieved after extensive practice and the renunciation 
of sensual pleasures. This is the joy referred to earlier when the 
Gita discussed the yoga practices that lead to realisation of the 
inner self; verse 21 of Chapter 6 speaks of sukham atyantikam, 
the highest happiness that is atindriyam, beyond the grasp of the 
senses. The rajasic happiness, by contrast, is the pleasure we enjoy 

--- PAGE 270 ---
Bhagavad-gita
262
through satisfaction of the senses. Here the pleasure is immediate, 
but in the long term it leads only to distress as old age, death, 
and disease bring us to a state of sensory deprivation and despair. 
One might also suggest that there is a certain emptiness in life 
where one’s happiness is obtained purely through the senses and, 
furthermore, that this sense of emptiness and ennui is a symptom 
of modern culture predominated by the capitalist ethos. And 
finally, the happiness shaped by tamas comes from the fulfilment 
of neither spiritual nor material goals. It is a form of happiness 
based on foolishness, indolence, and intoxication, and again is 
something that is not unfamiliar in the modern world.
From this point on, the teachings of the chapter change direc-
tion, and Krishna begins his summary and conclusion of the 
teachings he has previously imparted, although verse 40 does 
provide something of a link and a lead in to this new direction. 
The analysis of life and the world based on the three gunas is now 
complete, and the Bhagavad-gita is again turning its attention 
back to one of its earlier concerns – the question of how a person 
can fulfil his social duties whilst simultaneously pursuing the 
goal of moksha. 
Verses 40–44: The qualities of the four varnas
40.	 Neither on earth nor in heaven amongst the gods is 
there any form of existence that is free of these three 
gunas, which are born of prakriti.
41.	
The duties of brahmins, kshatriyas, vaishyas, and shudras, 
O scorcher of the foe, are designated in accordance 
with the gunas and which arise from the inherent 
nature of each.
42.	 Tranquillity, restraint, austerity, purity, patience, honesty, 
theoretical knowledge, practical knowledge, and faith 
in the Vedic revelation are the duties of a brahmin, 
born of his inherent nature.
43.	
Heroism, energy, resolve, expertise, never fleeing from 
battle, charity, and displaying a lordly disposition are 
the duties of a kshatriya, born of his inherent nature.

--- PAGE 271 ---
Chapter 18
263
44.	 Agriculture, tending cows, and trade are the duties 
of a vaishya, born of his inherent nature, whilst work 
consisting of service to others is the duty of a shudra, 
born of his inherent nature.
The intention here is to lead the discussion back towards the idea 
of karma-yoga by drawing our attention to the question of social 
obligation. However, we are first given an interesting account of 
the duties of the four varnas, the four original social divisions that 
are often regarded as the origins of the Hindu caste system. In 
recent years, the caste system has become a controversial feature 
of the Hindu traditions and many modern Hindus feel that it 
should be regarded as a social phenomenon unconnected with 
the practice of religion. The Bhagavad-gita has a significant role 
to play in this discussion as it provides important insights into 
the relationship between social duty and the inherent nature of 
a living being as determined by the presence of the three gunas.
The relationship between the gunas and the varnas
The relationship is not overtly stated here, but in verses 40 and 41 
we read firstly that all forms of life in this world are influenced 
by the gunas and then that the duties of the four social classes are 
designated in accordance with the gunas that arise from inherent 
nature. Hence the implication is that the four varnas have differ-
ent duties to perform reflecting the prevalence of sattva, rajas, or 
tamas in each of the social classes.
The qualities of a brahmin as discussed in verse 42
Although verse 42 refers to brahma-karma, the duties of a brah-
min, the list given here really refers to the character required 
for one who is a member of the highest social class. Essentially, 
the brahmin is one who displays the characteristics of the sat-
tvaguna: self-control, purity, honesty, and lack of material desire. 
The interesting point arises here as to whether one is therefore 
a brahmin by birth or by qualities. The suggestion of the Gita is 
that one is born with a certain inherent nature that naturally gives 
rise to these qualities, but does that occur only when a person 

--- PAGE 272 ---
Bhagavad-gita
264
is born into a brahmin family? We might also consider that the 
Hindu caste system has been the subject of much criticism from 
both within and without, and in many cases this criticism is fully 
justified. However, we might also note that in the social order 
recommended by the Bhagavad-gita the social elite worthy of 
most respect does not consist of those who are wealthy, powerful, 
or ostentatious, but of those who display intellectual, spiritual, 
and moral qualities and have a certain disdain for wealth and 
reputation. This view is one that stands in marked contrast to the 
way in which elites are generally formed in contemporary society.
What is action arising from inherent nature?
This is quite a complex question, but I would suggest that the 
view of the Bhagavad-gita is that previous actions shape the 
subtle body that surrounds the changeless atman so that one is 
born again under the influence of a specific combination of the 
three gunas. It is the influence of the gunas present from birth that 
determines the inherent nature of an individual; in other words, 
we are all born with different characters and personalities. That 
inherent nature determines the character of a person and this 
in turn makes a particular type of duty or action most suitable 
for a person. Therefore, the phrase ‘action arising from inherent 
nature’ refers to the type of duty and lifestyle most suitable for 
a person who possesses those particular qualities.
Verses 45–49: Karma-yoga
45.	 A man can attain perfection by devoting himself to 
his own particular duty. Now hear how a man who 
dedicates himself to his specific duty achieves that 
perfect state.
46.	 He is the one out of whom all beings have evolved 
and he pervades this whole world. It is by worship-
ping the Deity through the performance of his proper 
duty that a man achieves that perfect state.
47.	
Even though it may have faults, one’s own dharma is 
still superior to accepting the dharma of another, even 

--- PAGE 273 ---
Chapter 18
265
if that dharma is perfectly observed. By performing 
the action prescribed in accordance with his inherent 
nature, a person never incurs any sin.
48.	 Even if it be beset by faults, a person should never 
give up the type of action he is born to perform, 
Kaunteya. All endeavours are tainted by some fault, as 
fire is tainted by smoke.
49.	 His mind is detached from everything, he has con-
quered his own self, and he is free from hankering; it 
is by means of such renunciation that a person attains 
the supreme state, free from the results of action.
The discussion of varna and the dharma, or action, associated with 
varna leads naturally to a recapitulation of the topic of karma-yoga 
that was covered in some detail in Chapters 2–5 of the text. The 
fact that this is a recapitulation of previous ideas is made even 
clearer by the fact that verse 47 is almost identical to verse 35 of 
the third chapter.
It seems apparent that Krishna is now concluding his teachings 
in an appropriate manner by summarising the main points he 
has been seeking to convey, starting with the idea of karma-yoga 
that dominated the opening phases of the Gita. There is, how-
ever, a very interesting feature here that was less apparent when 
karma-yoga was discussed earlier in the text. 
It is significant to note here how the Gita overtly links its 
previous idea of karma-yoga with its later emphasis on bhakti, 
something that was much less apparent in the earlier chapters. 
The point made here is that dharma is an inherent feature of the 
creation generated by the Supreme Deity and therefore adherence 
to dharma is an act of worship dedicated to the Deity. Previously, 
karma-yoga was advocated because it changed the motive behind 
the action from selfish gain to performance of social duty, but 
now we find that action is to be performed because it as an act 
of worship. What we are seeing in this summary is that Krishna 
wants to confirm that his treatise is primarily about devotion 
to a personal God, and in this final chapter he shows that his 
previous teachings on karma-yoga and then on the acquisition 

--- PAGE 274 ---
Bhagavad-gita
266
of knowledge of the self also form a part of the major theme of 
the discourse, which is the nature of God and worship of God.
One further point we might note here in relation to our pre-
vious discussion of varna arises from the phrase saha-jam karma 
in verse 48. Saha-jam literally means ‘born along with’, and so 
the indication is that one is born to perform a particular type of 
action. This is not quite the same as meaning that one’s varna is 
determined by birth, but it does appear to be an indication in 
that direction.
Verses 50–53: The path of knowledge
50.	
Now learn from me in brief, Kaunteya, how one who 
has achieved this success then attains Brahman, which 
is the culmination of realised knowledge.
51.	
It is by properly engaging his purified intellect, con-
trolling himself by his resolve, renouncing the objects 
of the senses such as sound, and setting aside both 
desire and hate;
52.	
Living in a deserted place, eating only a small amount, 
regulating his speech, body, and mind, constantly ded-
icating himself to the yoga of meditation and main-
taining a mood of detachment;
53.	
Giving up egotism, physical power, pride, desire, anger, 
and any sense of possession, having no conception 
of ‘mine’, and remaining always at peace; it is thus 
that he becomes fit to attain the state of being that 
is Brahman.
Here the process of summary and conclusion is continued as 
Krishna now refers again to the yoga practice that leads to the 
acquisition of knowledge of the true self. This in itself provides 
us with a valuable insight into how the Bhagavad-gita regards its 
own central teachings as being based first on karma-yoga, then on 
the acquisition of spiritual knowledge and finally devotion to the 
Supreme Deity. It is also significant that here verse 50 appears to 
suggest a progression on the spiritual path from the karma-yoga 
just discussed towards the realisation of knowledge considered 

--- PAGE 275 ---
Chapter 18
267
here. Perfection in karma-yoga provides a basis from which one can 
proceed to the next step, which involves regulation of the senses 
and the practice of the yoga of meditation, the dhyana-yoga that 
brings the yogin to the Brahman state of being – brahma-bhuyaya 
kalpate. In these three verses, 51–53, we seem to have a succinct 
restatement of the truths revealed in the sixth chapter, which 
followed on from the previous discussion of karma-yoga, the same 
order of teachings as is presented here in summary form.
Verses 54–56: The way of bhakti
54.	
Existing as Brahman, with his mind made tranquil, he 
neither laments nor hankers for anything. He is equal 
to all living beings. Such a person achieves the highest 
state of devotion to me.
55.	
And it is through this devotion that he gains knowl-
edge of me, of what and who I am. When he thus 
properly understands me, he then immediately enters 
my being.
56.	 Though he always performs his prescribed duties, he 
remains dependent upon me and through my grace 
he attains the eternal, changeless position.
In these three verses, Krishna reminds us of the third of the major 
ideas the Bhagavad-gita has presented to its readers and hearers, 
devotion to the Supreme Deity. The sequence given here is an 
interesting one. In verse 54, it seems that the ultimate level of 
knowledge, existing as Brahman, is the point from which one 
is able to move on to the stage of bhakti. This would seem to 
suggest that just as karma-yoga leads to realised knowledge of the 
Brahman identity, so this knowledge leads on to the higher state 
of devotion to God. However, this understanding is complicated 
by the statement of verse 55 where we read that bhakti in turn 
leads to knowledge of Krishna – bhaktya mam abhijanati – and 
that it is this knowledge of Krishna that is the true gateway to 
liberation from rebirth. Then in verse 56 we find a reassertion of 
the view that karma-yoga is a part of devotional practice, as was 
stated earlier in verse 46; and here it is stated that moksha is not 

--- PAGE 276 ---
Bhagavad-gita
268
just attained through knowledge of Krishna but also through 
the gift of grace bestowed by the Deity – mat-prasadad avapnoti 
shashvatam padam avyayam.
So what are we to make of this? It seems that the rather sim-
plistic idea of a linear progression through different phases of 
spiritual life cannot be sustained. There are not three distinct 
phases – karma-yoga, jñana, and bhakti – with each stage leading 
to the next and ultimately to liberation from rebirth, but rather a 
single all-embracing spirituality that includes these three differing 
but equally significant component elements. So persons on the 
spiritual path may be performing karma-yoga, meditation on the 
atman to gain higher knowledge, or devotional worship of the 
Supreme Deity, but in fact they are all following the same broad 
spiritual path. And here, we may recall the words that Krishna 
spoke in Chapter 5 – ekam samkhyam cha yogam – Samkhya and 
yoga are, in essence, the same.
Verses 57–60: Advice to Arjuna
57.	
Mentally renouncing all your actions to me, dedicat-
ing yourself to me, and resorting to the buddhi-yoga, 
you should keep your mind always fixed on me.
58.	
By keeping your mind fixed on me you will over-
come all these difficulties through my grace. But if 
through pride you do not listen, you will surely perish.
59.	
If you surrender to your sense of ego and think, ‘I 
will not fight’, this determination will be of no avail 
for your inherent nature will surely exert its control 
over you.
60.	 Bound to your specific duty, Kaunteya, which arises 
from your inherent nature, you will be compelled to 
perform the action that because of illusion you do not 
wish to perform.
So now the teachings of the Bhagavad-gita have been summa-
rised and concluded, but there are still a few points to tie up, the 
first of which takes us back to the original starting point of the 
discourse as the full instruction that has been given is now to be 

--- PAGE 277 ---
Chapter 18
269
applied to Arjuna’s specific case. The wisdom has been given, so 
what should Arjuna do now?
A careful reading of verses 57 and 58 reveals that Krishna 
is suggesting that Arjuna should employ all three of the paths 
he has just summarised, karma-yoga (renouncing all actions to 
me), bhakti (dedicating yourself to me ... through my grace), and 
realised knowledge (keep your mind always fixed on me). If 
Arjuna accepts these teachings, then he will cross beyond all his 
difficulties; in other words, the dilemma he expressed in the first 
chapter will be resolved through the teachings Krishna has given.
No choice but to fight
In verses 59 and 60, Krishna is telling Arjuna that he really has 
no choice in the matter of whether or not to fight. Why is this? 
As has already been explained, each person has a specific sva-
bhava or inherent nature formed by a configuration of the three 
gunas and reflected in the varna system of classical Indian society. 
Arjuna is a kshatriya, a warrior and a ruler, but this designation 
is not just because of his birth in a royal family. It reflects his 
inherent nature, which cannot be changed. Arjuna is a warrior 
by nature, and he cannot change that identity as a matter of free 
will. It is what he is. Fire must be hot, the sun must shine, and a 
kshatriya must take part in battle. So adherence to varna-dharma 
is not just what is right in the sense of moral choice; it is what is 
natural in terms of the way the world is created.
Is there such a thing as free will?
This passage gives significant support to the determinist view 
of human nature, suggesting that the actual extent of our free 
will is very limited. Arjuna saw himself as having the power to 
make the choice as to whether to fight or not, but here Krishna 
is asserting that it is not possible for any person to act against 
his or her inherent nature. This provides confirmation for an 
earlier assertion found in verse 33 of Chapter 3. However, we 
must note here that this is not the whole story, for a few verses 
later we have the paradox of Krishna saying to Arjuna, yathecchasi 

--- PAGE 278 ---
Bhagavad-gita
270
tatha kuru, you must act as you see fit. As is so often the case in 
studying the Bhagavad-gita, we must be wary of simplistic creeds 
in matters of doctrine.
Verses 61–63: The Lord within every being
61.	 The Lord is situated in the region of the heart of all 
beings and he causes every being to revolve through 
life, mounted on the machine conducted by his mysti-
cal power (maya).
62.	 You should surrender your entire being to him alone, 
Bharata. Then by his grace you will attain that eternal 
position which is absolute peace.
63.	 I have now revealed to you this wisdom, which is the 
deepest of all mysteries. After fully considering what 
you have heard, you should then act as you see fit.
Here the Gita expands upon its previous point relating to the 
control exercised by inherent nature over each individual. From 
the previous verses, it might have appeared that this was part of 
a natural process of cause and effect, and hence just one of the 
laws of nature that govern the universal order. Here, however, as 
in Chapter 16, a theistic dimension is added to the equation. It 
is not just that svabhava, inherent nature, exerts its influence over 
the living being as a natural part of its identity, the whole process 
is overseen by the ‘Lord of all beings’ – ishvarah sarva-bhutanam – 
who is situated in the region of the heart – hrid-deshe … tishthati.
What does this mean? It is not an entirely new idea for the 
same assertion is to be found in 15.15, but should we take the 
‘Lord of all beings’ to mean the atman, the individual soul, or 
is this referring to the antaryamin or paramatman, an expansion 
of the Deity who sits alongside the individual atman? Advaitins 
will tend to follow the former interpretation (although Shankara 
accepts that the verse is referring to Vishnu), whilst Vaishnavas 
such as Ramanuja and Madhva hold to the second opinion. Both 
interpretations are certainly possible, but in this case the active 
role played by the ishvara in controlling the transmigration of 
the soul does suggest an external Deity rather than the soul itself. 

--- PAGE 279 ---
Chapter 18
271
Moreover, the Deity in the heart of every being seems to play 
the role of the traditional monotheistic God by granting salva-
tion to those who become his devotees. In Chapter 12, Krishna 
stated that he himself is this saviour who delivers the devotees 
and hence one must presume that the Deity in the heart referred 
to here is in fact Krishna himself, though the idea is expressed 
in the third person rather than the first.
And finally we cannot ignore the instruction given in verse 
63, which in many ways seems to typify the Hindu approach 
to religious authority. Krishna is the Supreme Deity, he is God, 
and he has given revealed truth to the world, but still the ulti-
mate choice is left up to us. If we follow the instruction then it 
will be for our benefit, but we must only do so after carefully 
considering what has been said and recognising its validity. Does 
Arjuna have free will in this? Apparently so, for he is told to act 
as he sees fit, and hence he is not wholly under the control of 
his inherent nature. Thus we are to some extent independent 
beings who do have the power to make choices, and even where 
the Hindu God issues a command he does so with the caveat, 
‘Think about this carefully, and then do as you wish’ because 
ultimately, the scripture is our servant and guide, but it is not 
our master.
Verses 64–66: Absolute devotion to Krishna
64.	 Now listen again to the ultimate teaching, which 
is indeed the deepest mystery. You are very dear to 
me, this is certain, and therefore I will reveal this for 
your benefit.
65.	
Fix your mind on me, become my devotee, worship 
me, and bow down to me. Then you will come to 
me; this is my certain promise, for you are dear to me.
66.	 Abandoning all types of dharma, take shelter with 
me alone. I will deliver you from all sins so do 
not grieve.
The Bhagavad-gita is now effectively over. The teachings have 
been given, they have been summarised and concluded, and 

--- PAGE 280 ---
Bhagavad-gita
272
then they have been applied to the specific case of Arjuna so 
that he can see a way out of his predicament. Still, however, 
Krishna is concerned to ensure that his main point has been 
heard and understood. And what is that point? Again, it is 
devotion and surrender to God. 65 and 66 are two famous 
verses amongst the Vaishnavas and 66 could be said to encap-
sulate the entire religious philosophy of Ramanujacharya. It 
is a doctrine of complete surrender and dependence upon a 
personal Deity who will reciprocate our devotion by relieving 
us from the sufferings of life. In verse 66, Krishna utters the 
famous words, aham tva sarva-papebhyo mokshayishyami, I will 
deliver you from all forms of papa. The word papa is usually 
understood in the sense of sin and the karmic reaction that 
results from acts of wickedness, but it can also be taken in 
the wider sense of difficulty, suffering, and affliction. We face 
many difficulties in life, but here Krishna, the Supreme Deity, 
promises that he himself will intervene in the case of those 
who are utterly dependent upon him and relieve them from 
all their difficulties.
Hinduism (for want of a better term) is a remarkable religious 
tradition that seems to defy any sort of categorisation. Here in the 
Gita and elsewhere in the Upanishads it has been revealed that 
the highest reality is one’s own self, and that the highest spiritual 
achievement is knowledge of the self, which is knowledge of all 
things. But here we encounter a rather different form of religion, 
a form of monotheism in which a personal God instructs us to 
worship him in a mood of love, to become dependent upon him, 
and promises that he will reciprocate by acting as the saviour 
who delivers the worshipper from the miseries of the world. So 
often it seems that every idea that has ever occurred in the his-
tory of religiosity is to be found somewhere within the dharma 
of the Hindus.
Verses 67–71: Teaching the gita to others
67.	 You should not reveal these teachings to anyone who 
lacks austerity or is bereft of devotion, nor to one 

--- PAGE 281 ---
Chapter 18
273
who does not wish to hear it or one who is envious 
of me.
68.	 But one who imparts this supreme mystery to my 
devotees, thereby displaying the highest devotion to 
me, will come to me. There is no doubt about this.
69.	 There is no one amongst men who can perform a 
deed more pleasing to me than this, and nor will there 
be any person more dear to me than he.
70.	 And if anyone studies this conversation between us, 
which is based on dharma, then he is in fact wor-
shipping me through the yajña of knowledge. That is 
my view.
71.	 Any man endowed with faith and free of malice 
who listens to this discourse is liberated thereby 
and attains the auspicious worlds gained by those of 
righteous deeds.
Now the last word really has been spoken and we move on to 
the sort of passage that is to be found at the end of most Hindu 
religious texts, pointing out the benefits that can be accrued by 
one who recites, hears, or studies this revelation. Firstly, how-
ever, we are told that the message should not be imparted to one 
who is not a suitable recipient. Jesus gave a similar instruction to 
his disciples with the wonderful metaphor, ‘Cast not thy pearls 
before swine.’ In other words, there is no point in preaching the 
highest spiritual truths to those who are more in need of basic 
moral instruction.
On the other hand, one who passes on this wisdom to those 
who will receive it in an appropriate manner are blessed by 
Krishna and become dear to him. Moreover, anyone who studies 
this conversation and anyone who hears it with humility and 
respect will also be benefited in their spiritual quest. The point 
here is that hearing alone is not necessarily beneficial, for some 
scholars and some adherents of other faiths have studied the Gita 
in a critical manner seeking only to find grounds for condem-
nation. It is hardly to be expected that such persons will gain 
spiritually from their contact with the text.

--- PAGE 282 ---
Bhagavad-gita
274
Verses 72–73: Arjuna accepts Krishna’s instruction
72.	 Have you listened to this instruction with a focused 
mind, Partha? Is your confusion, based on ignorance, 
now dispelled, Dhanamjaya?
73.	 Arjuna said: The confusion is dispelled and through 
your grace I have regained my understanding. I am 
now resolute, my doubts have vanished, and I am 
ready to act in accordance with your instruction.
Here then is the simple and anticipated conclusion to the Bhaga-
vad-gita, at least in terms of its position within the Mahabharata 
narrative. At the start of the Gita, Arjuna was moving towards 
Yudhishthira’s position of condemning warfare as an illegitimate 
act even where the cause is a just one. Now after Krishna’s speech 
he accepts that his previous reluctance was based on a lack of 
understanding, which has been rectified by the teachings he 
has absorbed.
This is not quite the end of the story, however, for in the 
opening encounters of the Kurukshetra War, which are described 
in the Mahabharata chapters that follow on from the Bhaga-
vad-gita, we find that on at least two occasions Arjuna again 
displays a reluctance to fight, particularly when the flow of battle 
brings him into conflict with Bhishma. Considering his apparent 
resolve here, it is a little surprising to find Arjuna relapsing back 
towards his previous hesitancy after battle has been joined, to the 
extent that at one point Krishna himself comes close to attacking 
Bhishma and is only prevented from doing so by Arjuna’s promise 
to fight more vigorously.
Verses 74–78: Samjaya’s conclusion
74.	 Samjaya said: Thus I have heard this wonderful con-
versation between Vasudeva and the high-souled 
Partha, which makes my hair stand on end.
75.	
It is through the grace of Vyasa that I have heard this 
supreme mystery, this doctrine of yoga, as revealed 
by Krishna himself who is indeed the master of 
yoga (yogeshvara).

--- PAGE 283 ---
Chapter 18
275
76.	 O king, as I constantly recall this enthralling and 
sacred conversation between Keshava and Arjuna, I 
repeatedly experience this sense of ecstasy.
77.	 And as I repeatedly recall the magnificent form dis-
played by Hari, great is my sense of wonder, O King, 
and again and again I feel a thrill of supreme delight.
78.	 Wherever there is Krishna, the master of yoga, and 
wherever there is Partha who bears the bow, there will 
also be good fortune, victory, success, and good judge-
ment. That is my opinion.
Now we are once more back with the conversation between 
Samjaya and Dhritarashtra, as Samjaya expresses his wonder and 
delight at the words he has heard and the vision he was able to 
share. The ‘grace of Vyasa’ refers back to the Mahabharata narra-
tive in which Samjaya was given mystical vision by Vyasa so that 
he was able to view all the events that occur on the battlefield, 
and then relate them to the blind Dhritarashtra who remained 
in his palace in Hastinapura. And it is not just the Bhagavad-gita 
that is spoken in this form from Samjaya to Dhritarashtra. The 
whole battle narration, which covers four of the Mahabharata’s 
eighteen books, is spoken by Samjaya to Dhritarashtra in the 
same extended dialogue.
So the Bhagavad-gita draws to its conclusion with a reminder 
to Dhritarashtra that despite all his hopes and schemes he cannot 
hope for victory in this encounter because of the presence on 
the opposing side of both Krishna who is the lord of all beings 
and Arjuna, the unconquerable archer.
Conclusion: A summary of Chapter 18
Chapter 18 passes through a number of different phases in its 
lengthy course. It starts with a discussion of whether ritual acts 
are to be given up or continued in a detached state of mind, 
determining that the latter course is superior, and then proceeds 
to a more detailed consideration of the nature of action and the 
transcendent nature of the true self, which is merely a witness. 
Krishna then resumes his systematic series of analyses based on 

--- PAGE 284 ---
Bhagavad-gita
276
the three gunas, which was begun in Chapter 17 but interrupted 
by the extended review of the nature of action and renunciation 
of action. In this chapter, six topics are subjected to scrutiny 
in terms of sattva, rajas, and tamas: knowledge, action, the per-
former of action, understanding, resolve, and happiness. And 
in a number of cases, a connection is to be noted between the 
quality of sattva and the performance of karma-yoga. From verse 40 
onwards, Krishna begins his summary of the main points he has 
covered in the Gita as a whole, focussing on karma-yoga, realised 
knowledge, and devotion to the Supreme Deity, revealing that 
these three are constituent parts of one spiritual path. We then 
return to Arjuna’s dilemma over whether to fight in the battle, 
as Krishna suggests that the teachings he has given provide an 
effective resolution to the problem. After a further reminder of 
the importance of devotion to God in removing life’s difficulties, 
Arjuna states that he is now convinced by Krishna’s arguments 
and that he will fight in the upcoming battle. The chapter and 
the Gita as a whole conclude with Samjaya telling Dhritarashtra 
of his sense of delight and wonder at the teachings he has heard 
and the vision he saw. The presence of Krishna and Arjuna 
ensures that the Pandava host will gain a great victory over the 
sons of Dhritarashtra.

--- PAGE 285 ---

277
Bibliography
Brockington, J., The Sacred Thread, Edinburgh University Press, 1998.
Edgerton, F., The Bhagavad Gita Translated and Interpreted, Harvard 
University Press, 1997.
Flood, G. (ed.), The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism, Blackwell, 2003.
Swami Gambhirananda, Bhagavad Gita with the Commentary of Sankaracharya, 
Nesma Books, 2000.
Gandhi, M.K., The Bhagavad Gita According to Gandhi, Berkeley Hills 
Books, 2000.
Johnson, W., The Bhagavad Gita, Oxford Paperbacks, 2004.
Leggett, T., Realization of the Supreme Self: The Bhagavad Gita Yogas, New 
Age Books, 2002.
Mehta, R., From Mind to Super Mind: A Commentary on the Bhagavad Gita, 
Motilal Banarsidass, 2001.
Minor, R., The Bhagavad Gita: An Exegetical Commentary, Heritage, 1982.
Prabhupada, A.C.B., Bhagavad Gita As It Is, BBT, 1983.
Sharma, A., The Hindu Gita, Open Court, 1986.
Sukthankar, V. S., On the Meaning of the Mahabharata, Bombay, 1957.
Sutton, N., Religious Doctrines in the Mahabharata, Motilal Banarsidass, 2000.
Swami Satchidananda, Bhagavad Gita: Living Gita, Integral Yoga 
Publications, 1988.
Zaehner, R.C., The Bhagavad Gita, Oxford University Press, 1973.

--- PAGE 286 ---

--- PAGE 287 ---

279
Names of Krishna and Arjuna
Supplied by Rogier Vrieling and Dr Rembert Lutjeharms
These names appear in the original Sanskrit text (verse numbers 
in parentheses). They are not all referred to in the translated text.
Names of Krishna
Acyuta – He who never fails His devotees and who never falls 
down from His position. (1.21, 11.42, 18.73)
Adhiyajña – the Lord of sacrifice; the Super-soul, the plenary 
expansion of the Lord in the heart of every living being. 
(8.2, 8.4)
Adideva – the original Supreme God. (11.38)
Adikarta – the supreme creator. (11.37)
Amitavikrama – having unlimited strength. (11.40)
Ananta – He who is unending; He who has no limit. (11.37)
Ananta-rupa – unlimited form. (11.38) See also: Vishvamurti, 
Vishvarupa.
Anantavirya – having unlimited potency. (11.19, 11.40)
Aprameya – who is immeasurable. (11.17, 11.42)
Apratimaprabhava – whose power is immeasurable. (11.43)
Arisudana – killer of the enemies. (2.4)
Bhagavan – who possesses all opulences; the reservoir of all beauty, 
strength, fame, wealth, knowledge and renunciation. (10.14, 
10.17, (shri-bhagavan uvaca: 2.2, 2.11, 2.55, 3.3, 3.37, 4.1, 4.5, 
5.2, 6.1, 6.35, 6.40, 7.1, 8.3, 9.1, 10.1, 10.19, 11.5, 11.32, 
11.47, 11.52, 12.2, 13.2, 14.1, 14.22, 15.1, 16.1, 17.2, 18.2))
Bhutabhavana – source of all manifestations; origin of everything. 
(9.5, 10.15)

--- PAGE 288 ---
Bhagavad-gita
280
Bhutabhrt – maintainer of all living entities. (9.5)
Bhutesha – Lord of everything; the supreme controller of every-
one. (10.15)
Deva – God. (11.14, 11.15, 11.44, 11.45)
Devadeva – Lord of all demigods; God of gods. (10.15, 11.13)
Devavara – great one amongst the demigods; best of gods. (11.31)
Devesha – Lord of all lords; God of the gods. (11.25, 11.37, 11.45)
Govinda – giver and object of pleasure to the cows and to the 
senses. (1.32, 2.9)
Hari – who removes all inauspiciousness and steals the hearts of 
His devotees. (11.9, 18.77)
Hrishikesha – the Lord who directs the senses of the devotees; the 
master of the senses. (1.15, 1.20, 1.24, 2.9, 2.10, 11.36, 18.1)
Isha – the Supreme Lord. (11.44)
Ishvara – the Supreme Lord; the Supreme Controller. (4.6, 15.17, 
18.61)
Jagannivasa – refuge of the universe. (11.25, 11.37, 11.45)
Jagatpati – Lord of the entire universe. (10.15)
Janardana – maintainer of all living entities; chastiser of the 
enemies. (1.35, 1.38, 1.43, 3.1, 10.18, 11.51)
Kala – time (another form of Krishna). (11.32)
Kamalapatraksha – lotus-petal-eyed one. (11.2)
Keshava – the Supreme Lord, Krishna, who has fine, long black 
hair; killer of the demon Keshi. (1.30, 2.54, 3.1, 10.14, 11.35, 
13.1, 18.76)
Keshinishudana – killer of the Keshi demon. (18.1) See also 
Keshava.
Krishna – ‘dark blue’; the two-armed form of the Supreme Lord; 
the all-attractive person. (1.28, 1.31, 1.40, 5.1, 6.34, 6.37, 
6.39, 11.35, 11.41, 17.1, 18.75, 18.78)
Madhava – husband of the goddess of fortune; He who appeared 
in the Madhu dynasty. (1.14, 1.36)
Madhusudana – killer of the demon Madhu. (1.34, 2.1, 2.4, 6.33, 
8.2) 
Mahabahu – having mighty arms. (6.38, 11.23, 18.1) See also 
(Names of Arjuna) Arjuna, Mahabahu.

--- PAGE 289 ---
Names of Krishna and Arjuna
281
Mahatma – the great Lord; the great soul. (11.12, 11.20, 11.37, 
11.50, 18.74)
Mahayogeshvara – the most powerful mystic. (11.9)
Parameshvara – the supreme controller. (11.3, 13.28) 
Prabhu – the Lord, or the Master. (9.18, 9.24, 11.4, 14.21)	
	
Prajapati – the Lord of creatures (Vishnu). (3.10)
Purushottama – the most exalted person. (8.1, 10.15, 11.3, 15.18, 
15.19)
Sahasrabahu – thousand-handed one. (11.46)
Sakha – dear friend. (11.41)
Ugrarupa – whose form is fierce. (11.31)
Varshneya – descendant of Vrishni. (1.40, 3.36)
Vasudeva – son of Vasudeva; proprietor of everything, material 
and spiritual. (7.19, 11.50, 18.74)
Vishnu – the Personality of Godhead; He who pervades the 
entire universe. (10.21, 11.24, 11.30)
Vishvamurti – personification of the universe. (11.46)
Vishvarupa – whose form is the universe. (11.16)
Vishveshvara – Lord of the universe; the ultimate controller. 
(11.16) 
Yadava – He who appears in the Yadu dynasty. (11.41) 
Yajña – the personification of sacrifice; the goal and enjoyer of 
all sacrifices. (3.9, 4.23)
Yogeshvara – the supreme master of all mystic powers. (11.4, 
18.75, 18.78)
Yogi – supreme mystic. (10.17)

--- PAGE 290 ---
Bhagavad-gita
282
Names of Arjuna
Anagha – sinless one. (3.3, 14.6, 15.20)
Arjuna – ‘silver white’; the third son of Pandu and intimate 
friend of Lord Krishna. (1.46, 2.2, 2.45, 3.7, 4.5, 4.9, 4.37, 
6.16, 6.32, 6.46, 7.16, 7.26, 8.16, 8.27, 9.19, 10.32, 10.39, 
10.42, 11.47, 11.50, 11.54, 18.9, 18.34, 18.61, 18.76, (arjuna 
uvaca: 1.4, 1.21, 1.28, 2.4, 2.54, 3.1, 3.36, 4.4, 5.1, 6.33, 
6.37, 8.1, 10.12, 11.1, 11.15, 11.36, 11.51, 12.1, 13.1, 14.21, 
17.1, 18.1, 18.73))
 Bharata – descendant of Bharata. (2.14, 2.18, 2.28, 2.30, 3.25, 
4.7, 4.42, 7.27, 11.6, 13.3, 13.34, 14.3, 14.8, 14.9, 14.10, 15.19, 
15.20, 16.3, 17.3, 18.62)
Bharatarshabha – chief amongst the descen-dants of Bharata; best 
of the Bharatas. (3.41, 7.11, 7.16, 8.23, 13.27, 14.12, 18.36) 
Bharatasattama – best of the Bharatas. (18.4) 
Bharatashreshtha – chief of the Bharatas. (17.12)
Dehabhrtavara – best of the embodied. (8.4)
Dhananjaya – conqueror of wealth. (1.15, 2.48, 2.49, 4.41, 7.7, 
9.9, 10.37, 11.14, 12.9, 18.29, 18.72)
Dhanurdhara – carrier of the bow and arrow; carrier of the 
Gandiva bow, which can never be defeated in war. (18.78) 
Gudakesha – Arjuna, the master of curbing ignorance. (1.24, 
2.9, 10.20, 11.7)
Kapidhvaja – he whose flag was marked with Hanuman. (1.20) 
Kaunteya – son of Kunti. (1.27, 2.14, 2.37, 2.60, 3.9, 3.39, 5.22, 
6.35, 7.8, 8.6, 8.16, 9.7, 9.10, 9.23, 9.27, 9.31, 10.23, 10.27, 
10.31, 13.2, 13.32, 14.4, 14.7, 16.20, 16.22, 18.48, 18.50, 
18.60) 
Kiriti – diademed one. (11.35)
Kurunandana – beloved child of the Kurus. (2.41, 6.43, 14.13) 
Kurupravira – best among the Kuru warriors. (11.48) 
Kurusattama – best amongst the Kurus. (4.31) 
Kurushreshtha – best of the Kurus. (10.19) 
Mahabahu – having mighty arms. (2.26, 2.68, 3.28, 3.43, 
5.3, 5.6, 6.35, 7.5, 10.1, 14.5, 18.13) See also (Names of 
Krishna) Mahabahu.

--- PAGE 291 ---
Names of Krishna and Arjuna
283
Pandava – the son of Pandu. (1.14, 1.20, 4.35, 6.2, 10.37, 11.13, 
11.55, 14.22, 16.5) 
Parantapa – chastiser, subduer, conqueror of the enemy. (2.3, 2.9, 
4.2, 4.5, 4.33, 7.27, 9.3, 10.40, 11.54, 18.41)
Partha – son of Prtha (Kunti). (1.25, 1.26, 2.3, 2.21, 2.32, 2.39, 
2.42, 2.55, 2.72, 3.16, 3.22, 3.23, 4.11, 4.33, 6.40, 7.1, 7.10, 
8.8, 8.14, 8.19, 8.22, 8.27, 9.13, 9.32, 10.24, 11.5, 11.9, 12.7, 
16.4, 16.6, 17.26, 17.28, 18.6, 18.30, 18.31, 18.32, 18.33, 
18.34, 18.35, 18.72, 18.74, 18.78) See also Kaunteya, Pandava; 
Purusharshabha – best among men. (2.15)
Purushavyaghra – tiger among men. (18.4)
Savyasaci – ambidextrous archer. (11.33)
Tata – My (Krishna’s) friend. (6.40)

--- PAGE 292 ---

--- PAGE 293 ---

--- PAGE 294 ---
